--- Seite 21 ---
Copy the mind map on page 6 and add more industries or businesses to it. Add any jobs in these
industries that you can think of.
Say which industry or business you want to work in. Explain why.
Match the photos tothe activities.
I'd like to work in ... because ... it's
a modern / an international industry/sector.
For me, ... would be (most) interesting because | want
to work with computers/.
Working in ... would be good because | like working with people‘.
Today's podcast deals with the question ‘What is a dream job?’ Four people talk about their work and
whether they have found their dream job.
Look at the photos. What do you think these people do for a living?
a deal with complaints
advise customers
e work ona computer
b dothe filing
d_ give presentations
f answer phone calls
Answer the following questions.
What activities would you like to do in your future job? Add your own ideas.
Copy the table below, then listen to the podcast and note down the following information:
2 What do they like or dislike about their jobs?
3 Whohas found his/her dream job?
In my future job ! would like to travel a lot / advise customers
/ work on international projects /
After finishing my education, | can imagine working as ... an adviser / an assistant
/ a manager
Photo
Likes
My favourite job would be to work as
a manager
/ an office assistant in an international /
Dislikes
Dream job?
a medium-sized / a small company.
Mark
Yes O
Santina
Yes O
lara
Yes D
file)
togistics/Transport
There are
a lot of different industries and
businesses
you can work in.
Administration
psi eae
Write down your own defi
In my dream
job | would earn a lot of money
/ have a lot of free time /
The perfect/ideal job for me is working with customers /
For me, it’s important to have enough time for my hobbies/friends/.
ion of a dream job. Discuss your ideas in a group.

--- Seite 22 ---
for British students,
You are interested in getting some work experience abroad and you come across a website with advice
Before you read the text, answer the following questions with a partner.
Have you done a work placement or internship yet? If so, where?
Ifyou have, who organized it? (You, your school, or someone else?)
3 Ifyou had to find a work placement, how would you go about it?
Experience matters —
How you can benefit from a work placement
A work placement is a fantastic opportunity to
gain some work experience and it is likely to be
very helpful for your future career. In the UK,
one or two-week formal work placements are
arranged either by schools or by the students
themselves. Some people think that‘ work experi-
ence’ only refers to these short work placements,
but any form of work you do before you start a
job, whether it is voluntary or paid, is useful work
experience.
Even if it doesn’t last long, work experience gives
you taste of what it's like to work in a particular
job or industry. You will gain practical experience
and learn new skills which will put you in a
stronger position when you apply for a job.
In many cases, work placement opportunities
are not advertised, so you need to be proactive
and to make use of your connections. Or you can
© /-E TEE
approach companies directly to find out if they
offer work placement opportunities.
Apart from work placements organized by schools,
there are also a lot of other things you can do to
learn about the world of work and experience it
first-hand
Volunteering is one way to get a good insight
into a particular job, area or industry. If you
are interested in animals and nature, we can
recommend interesting internships or projects
for volunteers abroad. For example, why not take
part in a scientific research project that deals
with the conservation of reptiles, insects and
sea turtles in Costa Rica? Or you could volunteer
with an organization that helps refugees and
migrants in Southern Italy. These organizations
need a lot of support in many different areas
such as community work, food distribution, event
organization and helping migrants with their
daily activities.
Of course, it is a good idea to look for placements
that will help you gain skills you will actually
need in your future job. So, for example, if you
already know that you want to work in logistics,
it would be a good idea to find a placement with
Welcome to the world of work
impressed when they see that, and who knows
There is always the possibility that one of these
firms might hire you once you've finished school
or college.
Employers are very keen on work experience
because it helps them to assess your character,
skills and work ethic - so don't miss this oppor
a transport company. Employers are usually
tunity
to impress them!
(au words)
Read the text and answer the following questions.
Who arranges work placements in the UK?
How long does a typical work placement last?
Why is it sometimes difficult to find work placements?
Apart from formal work placements, how can students gain other forms of work experience?
Why can unpaid work also be useful for your career?
What kind of volunteer projects are recommended?
What should you do if you already have a clear idea about your future career?
Why are employers keen on work experience?
onanauwun-
Replace the underlined words or phrases with items from the list. Make sure the forms are correct.
a taste - approach + arrange - industry - keen on + opportunity + recommend + support
Formal work placements are organized either by the school or by the students themselves.
Work experience gives you an idea of what it's like to work in a job or industry.
Work placement opportunities are not always advertised, so you need to be proactive
and contact companies to find out what they offer.
Work experience is a fantastic chance to gain a little bit of experience.
The company suggests interesting internship and volunteer projects abroad.
These organizations need help in many different activities.
Ifyou already know which particular sector you want to work in, make sure you find
a placement there.
8 Employers are very interested in work experience.
sau»
Find the words or expressions in the text that match these definitions. They are in the correct order.
toacton your own initiative
6 aperson who pays other people
2 anunderstanding of something
to work for them
3 another word for work placement
7 tobe positively surprised
4 aperson who does work for a good
8 your attitude towards work
cause and without payment
5 people who have been forced to leave
their home country
a a—R

--- Seite 23 ---
What do you think is good or bad about work placements? Write a short comment for the web:
In my opinion, work experience is a great
opportunity to ... because
| (don't) think a work placement is useful if
I'm not sure work placements are necessary
if/because
We'd like
to hear from you about work
experience: How is it organized in your
country? How useful do you think itis?
Please leave a comment here:
Your comment:
Use the table below to describe what people do in their jobs. Sometimes more than one option
is possible. Put the verbs into the correct form. (You don’t need to include words from column B
in all your sentences.)
simp
Example: An office assistant usually arranges appointments for their boss.
Aretail assistant manager
always
answer
appointments for their bos:
An office assistan
often
arrange | calls to other colleagues.
An HR assistant
regularly | check
customers
ina store.
Customer advisers
sometimes | have to
do a lot of administrative work.
Work placement students | usually
make sure | employee data in the company system.
order
job openings on the company intranet
post
office supplies for the whole department.
serve
phone calls.
transfer | that products are well-displayed.
the shop runs smoothly.
update
to gain experience in a company.
‘Ask questions about people's daily activities and respon:
's using words and phrases from 4A or
from the table below.
mple
pres
Example: Does Sophia often serve customers?
always
deal with angry customers
/ complaints?
Does | Lisa and her colleagues
often
do administrative work?
office employees
regularly
have an interesting
job?
Sophia
sometimes | have many interesting
tasks?
Sophia's job
usually
include making phone calls?
make travel arrangements for their boss?
serve customers?
tell applicants what their hiring status is?
7. -E TEE
Welcome to the world of work
Read the German job advertisement and then summarize the main points in English.
Kaufmännischer Assistent (m/w/d)
Stellenbeschreibung
typische Bürotätigkeiten
wie z.B. Anrufe entgegennehmen und weiterleiten, Termine
für die
Geschäftsleitung machen, Besprechungen organisieren
Kundengesprache und Beantwortung
von Fragen
- _ Unterstützung
der Geschäftsleitung und des Büroleiters
+ Vorbereitung
und Prüfung von Dokumenten
Daten im System aktualisieren
Stellenanforderungen
Idealerweise mindestens zwei Jahre Erfahrung im Backoffice oder in einer administrativen Tätigkeit
Kommunikationsfahigkeit
Sicherer Umgang mit
MS-Office-Programmen
In this job, the candidate will be responsible for ing
The job responsibilities (also) include ..ing
present company results.
deal with customer complaints.
arrange meetings.
talk to customers on the phone.
deal with customer queries.
update data.
prepare and check documents.
‘Asa part of his/her job, the candidate has to
In this role, he/she also has to
One of the duties is to
Abig part of the role as business assistant is to
The job requires ...
strong
communication
skills.
good
technical
excellent
computer
Astudent organization in the UK publishes a regular
podcast in which people talk about their jobs and work
experience. Today, the podcast includes
an interview
with Mara Miller, who is currently doing
a work placement.
Listen
to the podcast and answer the questions.
verstehen,
| SKILLS CHECKLIST |
stening
© Have | read the questions
first?
5 Have | listened once for general
understanding?
©] Have | made notes during the second
listening?
What does Mara want to do after
finishing school?
Where is her current work placement?
How long does her work placement last?
Why is she happy with her job?
Which part of the job doesn’t she like
very much?
6 Where is she this week?

--- Seite 24 ---
Welcome to the world of work
How does Mara describe her work? Choose the correct forms
then listen again to check your answers.
That's why I wanted to get some work experience in a hotel - and thats what
I'm doing / do right now.
Your company sends you to Ireland to attend an international workshop on
2 I'm working
/I work in an international hotel called the Grand Seaside Hotel
current trends in the world of work. The aim of the workshop is to collect ideas to make your
3 Im really glad
I got the job here because we're having / we have a lot of Spanish guests.
company fit for the future and an attractive employer for job applicants.
4 I'm doing /1do the work placement for two weeks and I'm now in my second week.
So what am I actually doing
/ do | actually do at work?
6 Sometimes I'm helping
/ help serve breakfast.
7 This week I'm working
/ I work at reception.
[KIOh
8 They ask things like‘When
are you serving
/ do you serve breakfast?”
Während des Workshops hören Sie eine Podiumsdiskussion zum Thema ‚Young people working
abroad‘
Look at the sentences in 6B agai
Say whether each sentence describes something that ...
a Marais doing at the moment
/ this week
b Mara generally does or does as a part of her job.
Make sentences to explain what is happening this week,
today
or at the moment.
Example: Jiang (write) == an email
to his business partner
in London right now.
Jiang is writing an email
to his business partner
in London right now.
Mara looks happy. She (enjoy) == her current work experience very much.
The new guests (still complete) == the registration form at reception.
1 (study) == Spanish at university at the moment.
Can you see the Millers at the back of the restaurant? They (have) = dinner.
This week, Mara (not practise) == her Spanish because there are no Spanish guests.
Sorry, Carla is busy right now. She (talk) == to a customer.
Mara is over there. She (just greet) == some guests from Canada.
X) _ Hören Sie sich das Interview an und machen Si
You can't join the meeting because you (do) == a training course this week.
Ihre Notizen ins Deutsche, damit Sie Ihren Vorgesetzten über die Inhalte des Interviews
informieren können.
tion:
Hörverst
Sie haben die Gelegenheit, Mara zu interviewen und befragen sie auf Englisch zu ihrem aktuellen Job.
Sie haben sich bereits folgende Fragen auf Deutsch notiert.
Gefällt ihr die momentane Arbeit
Englisch
Deutsch
Hotel?
un nor
Firmenname
Get Started International
2. Warum arbeitet sie in einem
internationalen Hotel?
Geschäftsfeld der Firma
3 Was lernt sie über die verschiede
seit wann tätig
nen Bereiche eines Hotels?
4 Arbeitet sie diese Woche an der
was bei Auslandseinsatz zu beachten ist (3 Punkte)
Rezeption?
ezepuon’
Dokumente fiir Nicht-EU-Arbeitnehmer
Was wird Mara vermutlich auf Ihre
berufliche Qualifikationen
Fragen antworten? Stützen Sie sich auf
Arbeitgeber (2 Punkt
den Podcast und schreiben Sie Maras
guter Arbeitgeber
PUNKS)
Antworten auf Ihre Interviewfragen.
‘Auswahl des Ziellandes (2 Punkte)

--- Seite 25 ---
Scenario support, 5.182
Im Rahmen des Workshops bekommen Sie ein Handout zum Thema ,Global mobility’,
das für Ihre Firma interessant sein könnte.
Lesen Sie das Handout und machen Sie sich auf Deutsch Notizen zu folgenden Punkten:
Warum wird das Thema „Globale Mobilität“ für Arbeitgeber immer wichtiger?
Warum wird Arbeiten im Ausland für Arbeitnehmer zunehmend attraktiv?
Was muss ein Arbeitgeber bedenken, wenn er Arbeitnehmer ins Ausland schickt?
Was ist der wesentliche Unterschied zwischen den beiden Möglichkeiten, Arbeitnehmer
ins Ausland zu entsenden?
Welche der beiden Optionen wird bei zeitlich befristeten Aufenthalten meistens gewählt?
Warum kann es für einen Arbeitnehmer attraktiv sein, befristet im Ausland zu arbeiten?
Global mobility
There is an increasing trend towards profes-
sional mobility. But what does this development
mean for companies and employees?
It's clear that the number of people taking up a
post abroad is increasing steadily. For companies,
mobility is becoming more and more important
because of global markets. And for employees,
working abroadisa great opportunity to enhance
their professional skills, which gives them an
advantage when they apply for a new job.
However, if someone intends to work abroad,
or a company wants to send an employee on a
foreign assignment, they need to be well pre
pared. It is best to get expert advice on any for-
malities that might be necessary.
There are several things a company needs to
think about when sending employees abroad.
First of all, how long will they be working abroad?
Secondly, where will they be working and what
kind of status will they have? And finally, what
is the best solution for both company and em-
ployee in terms of protection and cost?
Basically, there are two options: the first is the
posting of employees abroad, also called second-
ment. This means that the employee works for
another ‘host’ organization on a temporary basis
and returns to their original employer once the
posting is finished. Within the EU, employees
can be abroad on posted status for up to two
experience
CAREER
WORK *=
ABROAD
OPPORTUNITY
future
WORKING
NEW a —
years. Why choose this option? There can be
many reasons,
for example to help the candidate
with their career development or to gain more
experience or skills in a local subsidiary or af-
filiated company. It also offers employees the
chance to work on short-term projects abroad.
Employees posted abroad keep their employment
contract and remain employees of the home
company.
The second possibility is to suspend or terminate
an employee's contract with the home company
so that he or she can be employed by the host
company abroad. In this case, there is no direct
relationship between employee and home coun-
‘try orhome company. This type of arrangement is
not a posting. Companies sometimes choose this
option when they have a specific job to do abroad
and recruit a person for a specific assignment.
(358 Wörter)
Welcome to the world of work
Scenario support,
Während des Workshops wird jeder Teilnehmer gebeten, kurz ein Thema vorzustellen. Sie haben
das Thema „Challenges when working abroad” gewählt und dazu die folgenden Posts gelesen
Fassen Sie die Kernaussagen der Posts auf Englisch zusammen.
Tim,
Düsseldorf
Wenn man im Ausland arbeitet, hat man immer mit einer Sprachbarriere zu kämpfen
- auch wenn man die
Sprache gut spricht. Ich habe zwei Monate lang ein Praktikum in einem Transportunternehmen in London
gemacht, und es fiel mir anfangs sehr schwer, meine Kollegen
zu verstehen und mit ihnen zu sprechen. Sie haben
sehr schnell gesprochen und viele Redewendungen und Ausdrücke benutzt, die ich noch nie gehört hatte.
Ich musste sie oft bitten, Dinge zu wiederholen, was mir anfangs peinlich war. Aber ich muss sagen, sie waren
sehr freundlich und hilfsbereit, und gegen Ende meines Aufenthaltes war die Kommunikation viel einfacher!
Anna, Gelsenkirchen
Ich habe ein Jahr lang in Frankreich gearbeitet. Das Land fand ich toll, aber die ersten Wochen waren wirklich hart!
Es wurde besser, sobald ich meine Kollegen etwas näher kennenlernte und einige Freunde fand, mit denen ich
nach der Arbeit zusammen sein konnte. Es ist nicht so einfach, neue Freunde im Ausland zu finden, und außerdem
war es für mich schwer, so lange von meiner Familie und meinen Freunden getrennt zu sein. Ich hatte Heimweh
und vermisste sie sehr. Sicher, du kannst über Videochat in Kontakt bleiben, aber du brauchst auch jemanden, mit
dem du reden kannst und der dir helfen kann, wenn du ein Problem hast. Wenn man ins Ausland geht, sollte
man deshalb nicht vergessen, dass es Herausforderungen geben wird - es scheint nicht jeden Tag die Sonne!
Georg, Hückeswagen
Wenn man ins Ausland geht, weiß man, dass es kulturelle Unterschiede zwischen dem Heimatland und dem
Gastland gibt. Aber ich glaube, man erkennt sie erst richtig, wenn man da ist. Ich habe sechs Monate in Sevilla
verbracht. In den ersten Tagen war ich um 8.00 Uhr im Büro, aber es war niemand da. Es dauerte eine Weile,
bis mir klar wurde, dass die Leute hier erst gegen 9.30 Uhr mit der Arbeit beginnen, was ich für sehr spät hielt.
Dann haben wir gegen 13 Uhr immer mindestens eine Stunde lang zusammen gegessen. Siesta ist nicht mehr
so verbreitet, aber
es gibt noch Büros,
die am Nachmittag eine längere Pause einlegen. Das bedeutet,
dass die
‘Menschen abends länger arbeiten. Ich fand meine Zeit in Spanien
toll, aber ich fand es nicht gut, so lange im
Büro bleiben zu müssen. Ich bin nie vor 19 oder 20 Uhr gegangen.
(a12 wörter)
Zum Abschluss des Workshops werden Sie gebeten, selbst zum Thema Stellung zu nehmen
Discuss the challenges of working abroad with a partner. Also say what you would find most difficult.
| LANGUAGE
HELP |
What do you think you would find most difficult if you worked abroad?
| think it might be difficult to speak English /... all the time.
| guess | would miss my friends
/ brothers
and sisters /
For me, cooking/shopping/... would be the biggest challenge because

--- Seite 26 ---
‘OCUS ON BUSINESS .
Read the online job advert below and say which sentences are true or false.
Correct the false statements.
The company is looking for a person with a lot of professional experience
The job involves a lot of basic office tasks.
The position is offered for a limited period.
Applicants should have very good technical and IT skills.
‘The company wants candidates to send their application as quickly as possible.
Job title:
Wholesale assistant
FAST Wholesale
London (Central)
£19K per annum + excellent benefits
Industry:
Wholesale, buying
Job function:
Administration
Educationallevel:
Secondary school leaving certificate
Hours:
Fulltime
& Parttime O
Contract:
Permanent & Temporary O
This is an excellent opportunity
for someone early in their career to join one of the world’s
leading wholesale companies. As a wholesale assistant, you will be part of a team providing
support
to buying teams across the company.
For this role you will need strong admin and computer skills. You should also have excellent
communication skills.
Your responsibilities include:
carrying out routine activities including filing, printing, copying and scanning
handling customer queries
helping maintain the company’s document management system
Interested in this position? Send in your
CV asap by clicking on APPLY NOW.
Match the words from the online adverts above with the correct defini
recruiter
salary
b_an.official written agreement
buying goods in large quantities for resale
per annum
per year
special advantages a company gives to its employees
the basic duties the employee is responsible for
the company (or person) that hires somebody
the money somebody earns
wholesale
job function
5 benefits
8 contract
Welcome to the world of work
Copy the table and complete it with the mi
ing information from the two job adverts below.
What skills are
What personal qual
required?
should the ideal person have?
What does the company
offer the candidate?
GDT Wholesale
Clothescode
GDT Wholesale: Wholesale Assistant
We are looking for someone with a passion for customer service! The ideal candidate
will have out
standing people and communication skills and a good working knowledge of word processing, database
and presentation programs. You should be confident working with numbers and have very good organi:
zational and administrative
skills. Accuracy
and attention to detail are essential for this position! In this
role, you will support our accounts in the UK and overseas and report to the Account Manager.
Your responsibilities
will include entering, managing
and tracking sales orders and issuing weekly sales
reports. You will also attend meetings with wholesale customers in the UK and abroad. As
a part of your
job, you will answer customer questions, deal with requests and provide excellent customer service.
The company has just been recognized as ‘Wholesale Employer of the Year’ we offer a competitive salary,
outstanding working conditions and excellent benefits, for example travel discounts, discounted gym
membership, and the opportunity to take
a six-month sabbatical.
APPLY NOW — no matter if you are starting your career or are looking for a new challenge!
(203 Wörter)
ClothesCode: Administrative Assistant
‘We are looking for you ~a friendly and confident adminstrative assistant with a warm and enthusiastic
manner
-to join our fast-growing creative fashion retail store in London. This is your chance to learn and
grow in a newly-established company! Working in a fast-paced office, you will be working in a team of
hard-working and enthusiastic
young colleagues. In addition to an exciting and fun environment, we offer
an excellent salary and attractive benefits!
The focus of your typical working day will be basic administrative support, such as managing
the diary,
scheduling
and documenting meetings, organizing events and booking travel
The ideal candidate will be proactive, bright, personable, outgoing, social and resilient. To be suitable for
this role, you should also be a team player. Applicants should have at least two years’ office or admin
experience. Strong written and verbal communication skills are a must!
Start your new career with us today by clicking APPLY and filling in our application form.
(118 Wörter)
Which of these jobs do
you find more attractive?
‘And which would suit
you better? Explain why.
I think | would prefer
the job as a/an ... because it offers/provides
| would apply for the position as a/an ... because | think the
...is better.
The first job is definitely more attractive because
I think the second job is more suitable for me as I’m

--- Seite 27 ---
You are interested in the benefits that companies typically
offer. In the following text from a website, a young HR
professional answers questions on employment benefits.
Complete the sentences with the words from the box.
annual leave - flexible working hours - job duties
shift work - temporary + termination
E-Book - Unterrichtsmanager - Focus on Bu:
# When talking about how much
pay an employee will earn, sometimes
other words are used,
for example
salary, compensation or remuneration
A remuneration package is the total
an employee receives, including salary
plus benefits
such as
a company car,
health insurance, etc.
ess .5th NRW
Welcome to the world of work
You want to learn some useful vocabulary about training and qualifications and come across
this quiz on a web:
correct answer.
The British school leaving certificate
Alevels and the US high school diploma
are similar to the German
for German students who want
to apply for a job abroad. Choose the
Some students take a break between leaving
school and starting college or university.
This is known asa
a Hauptschulabschluss
a vacation year
b_ Mittlerer Schulabschluss
b gap year
In HR, we get many questions from employees
© Abitur
«sabbatical
about employment contracts. Most of the
questions focus on what should be included in
a typical employment contract, and what kind
2 The English term for IHK (Industrie-und
5 The German Abitur or Allgemeine
Handelskammer) is
Hochschulreife is best translated as
ee ment Kenetits ben
hand tack
a Chamber of Commerce
and Industry
a higher education certificate
ie Gato >
b Chamber of Trade
b_ high school qualification
© Chamber of Industry and Trade
university entrance qualification
Well, let’s start with the
facts that should
‘nak + en. A
normal, ie bat -
3 The British GSCE (General Certificate
6 Berufsschule, Berufskolleg or Gewerbliche
of Secondary Education) is similar to
Schule are often called technical or
should state the specific position and job title,
theGerman
training colleges in English.
the employee's ==" and responsibilities. Second,
a Mittlerer Schulabschluss
advanced
the work schedule and duration of employment must
be set out. That means the number of hours
an employee is expected
to work. Does the company offer
==:? Does
the job require ==, or working
nights or weekends? Can the employee work from home? And is it a permanent job or a
=¢ one?
What is also important is what the contract says about paid time off, for example sick days and
holidays. That means the contract needs to describe how many paid days of == you have — in other
words holiday entitlement, and what happens when you are unable to work for longer periods.
Of course, there are other things that need to be included in an employment contract such as
information about
==, which means describing how each party can terminate the work contract
Complete the sentences about two people’s educational background using the past tense form
of the verbs
in the box.
Simple
past,
attend - finish - join - take - train
if they need to.
Malik, 25
Gilford Grammar School in Bishopsville
Create a German leaflet with the key points of the text in 3A.
and school four years ago. After that,
2s. asales
assistant. During my holidays, + course in Excel,
which was very useful.
sthis company at the
beginning of the year, so everything is still new and
filo
The same website offers a podcast explaining what is usually included in the compensation and benefits
exciting
section of an employment contract.
Listen and complete the sentences from the contract excerpts with the correct benefits.
be « have + pass « practise + spend + start « take + work
1 Your will be EUR 48,000, payable
2 A_is paid oncea
year
3 ..afirst-class
fully
monthly to your bank account.
dependent
on business results.
paid by the employer.
Carla, 23 Before! working,| 7a gapyear
and *the first six months travelling. Then!
..private
including
5 ..subsidized
‚which offers hot
6 ... health
& well-being
an intensive business English course
for a couple of
dental and hospital plans.
meals, snacks and salads.
with
and sports facilities,
months, which _ really helpful. 'm so happy!"
yoga classes, running and
the final examination!
While | was studying, lalso "=
7 ..wecover _ ifyou take upa
facilities
for children
cycling clubs.
part-time ina hotel where!» my language skills
new position in another subsidiary.
atthe company site.
by speaking
to the guests.
Jr oe TE Ho %&-

--- Seite 28 ---
Welcome to the world of work
Use the table to describe what people have or haven't done.
fect,
Example:
| have already called three customers today.
You are doing an internship with a company that advises people who want to work abroad. Your boss,
Anna Klein, is planning
to put together some info material for an international
job and training fair.
already apply
an invitation to a job interview.
already call
for three jobs this year.
Scenario support, 5.182
ready
recei
typing
skills this
week
jest er ve
his toopuage test is wee!
‘Anna Klein asks you
to listen to a podcast called ‘The perfect CV’ to find some relevant information.
Finn
learn a lot
in my new job.
Listen and make notes in German.
versteh
not speak
three customers
today.
1 Lebenslauf
- wie wichtig?
4 Name
in USA?
Profil: Lange?
2 Ein Lebenslauf oder mehrere?
Ideale Länge?
8 Fotos?
3 Wie lange brauchtein Personalleiter,
6 Berufsprofil: wo?
9 Europass—was ist das?
Samira Finnagan got the job as administrative assistant with ClothesCode. Ask her questions using
the simple past or present perfect.
um einen Lebenslauf zu lesen?
Example: you / organize / any events / in your new role / yet?
Scenario support, S. 183
Have you organized any events in your new role yet?
‘Anna Klein asks you to summarize
this text for your company's information package.
you / book trips / for the other colleagues /
the sales meeting / take place / last week?
in your first week?
5 you / speak
/ to your
boss / yet?
you / meet / all your new colleagues / yet?
6 your boss / tell you / about the company
you / schedule / any meetings / so far?
dress code / when you saw him?
Bewerbungsschreiben — was gar nicht geht!
Wir alle machen Fehler. Das ist menschlich. Wichtig ist, dass
wir daraus lernen. Wie viele Bewerbungen
haben Sie verschickt, ohne eine Antwort zu erhalten? Dann sollten Sie sich fragen, warum. Wir sagen Ihnen,
Complete these sentences with the
simple past or present perfect form of the verbs in brackets.
was die „No-nos” sind - also Dinge, die Sie unbedingt vermeiden sollten.
What I (learn) == so far is that you need very good people management skills for this role.
FEHLER
durch
grelle
Farbe
He (send) == his application
last week, but he (not have) == any replies until now.
nn cure Eee Celery
When (you/do) == a professional development course?
He (never have) = a job interview
in English.
Two of my friends (take) == a typing course last December.
We (not receive) == any vocational training yet.
aununa
Look at the tip box. Then translate these sentences into English.
Sie hat das Berufskolleg erfolgreich absolviert.
Ich habe neun Jahre ein Gymnasium in Kéln besucht.
Mein Chef hat mir eine interessante Aufgabe gegeben.
Wir haben die IHK besucht, um Informationen über Berufsqualifikationen zu bekommen.
Gute Noten sind wichtig, um Ihren Traumjob zu bekommen.
Er hat sich auf die Stelle als Küchenchef im Marblestone Hotel beworben.
ousun-
© False friends are words that sound similar in different languages but have a different meaning.
Sind leider häufig. Trotz Autokorrektur
auf dem
Rechner kommen in Personalabteilungen viele
Bewerbungen an, die Fehler enthalten. Oft werden
sie direkt aussortiert. Achten Sie also auf Recht-
schreibung, Grammatik und Ton Ihres Schreibens.
Lassen Sie immer jemanden Korrektur lesen!
MASSENBEWERBUNGEN
Die Verantwortlichen in der Personalabteilung
erkennen sofort, ob eine Bewerbung individuell
geschrieben wurde oder ob es eine Massenbewer-
bung ist. Erwähnen Sie die in der Stellenanzeige
geforderten Qualifikationen und Anforderungen,
und zeigen Sie, dass Sie die Anzeige verstanden
haben. Lieber fünf individuelle Bewerbungen
schreiben als 50 Massenbewerbungen!
riesige Schrift, Grafiken oder gar lustige Bilder oder
Fotos zu beeindrucken. thre Leser/innen wollen
saubere, gut strukturierte und lesbare Unterlagen.
Eine vollgeschriebene Seite wird nicht dadurch
besser, wenn Sie wichtige Stellen rot markieren oder
unterstreichen!
KEIN ROTER FADEN
In Ihrer Bewerbung erzählen Sie Ihre Geschichte.
Und die muss in sich stimmig und logisch aufgebaut
sein. Die Leser/innen müssen erkennen,
wer Sie sind,
welche Erfahrung und Ziele Sie haben und warum
Sie die richtige Person für die Stelle sein könnten.
UNNATÜRLICHE SPRACHE
Ihre Bewerbungsunterlagen sollten sprachlich nach
Ihnen selbst klingen - und nicht wie jemand aus
English
BUNT, VOLL, LUSTIG
einem Buch. Sprechen Sie, wie es Ihrer Persönlichkeit
Gymnasium = grammar
school (UK), high school (US)
gymnasium = Sporthalle, Fitnesscenter
Klar soll die Bewerbung interessant sein und
entspricht
- möglichst natürlich,
aber professionell
absolvieren = complete, finish
absolve = die Absolution erteilen
aufallein abe
fn den weisen Filen ict der
(264 Wörter)
Noten = grades, marks
notes
= Notizen
Chef
= boss, superior
üchenchef
eier Gees alten ach!
ey pees
Use this title for your summary: What to avoid
in your
CV - Some no-nos
J- GF T BB BO A.

--- Seite 29 ---
‘OCUS ON BUSINESS .
Finn Hellmann
Palmenstraße 10, 51069 Cologne, Germany
finn.hellmann@web ger
Profile
Highly-motivated team player looking
to develop my skills and put
my experience in customer service
to profitable use with a company
in an English-speaking country. My goal is to develop professionally
and personally
and deliver excellent customer service.
Key skills & strengths
strong interpersonal skills
excellent verbal and written communication skills
accurate, detail-oriented, with exceptional organizational
skills
hard working, fast learning with a ‘can-do’ approach
Work experience
Since May 20.
Mar April 20.
Aug 20..— Nov 20.
Part-time back-office
job at Hiking, outdoor goods retailer in
Frankfurt: responibilities include helping buying goods, order
management, handling delivery issues.
Internship
at GEF, wholesaler for garden equipment: duties included
completing customer orders, checking processed orders, speaking
suppliers.
Gap period - Work & Travel scheme in Australia and New Zealand:
back-office experience at Crazy KIWI Retail, Auckland, (two weeks
in Aug 20.); part-time sales assistant
in retail store, Melbourne
(Sep- Nov 20.)
Education & qualifications
Since Aug 20.
‚Aug
20..— Jun 20.
Two-year, full-time course at Mendel-Berufskolleg (vocational training
college), Unna, Germany, to obtain German higher education entrance
qualification
Städtische Realschule (selective state secondary school), Düren
Additional skills
Native language
Other languages
Computer skills
Driving licence
German
English B1/B2, French A2
Excellent command of standard office computer software
Full German driving licence
Interests & activities
Running, travel, diving, volunteer with ‘Go Greener’ charity in Cologne
References
7. -E TEE
Available on request
Welcome to the world of work
‘Anna has received a British CV she likes and she wants to use it as an example in the info package.
She asks you to write a German checklist.
Read the CV opposite and note down in German the key information required in each part of
a British CV.
What differences do you notice between a British CV and a German one?
A covering letter can be in the form of
a written letter
or an email,
Read the email and note down the subject matter of each paragraph.
Michael.smith@fastitd.bxt
Betreff: Vacancy for entry level position as Wholesale Assistant, reference no. 34576
Von:
Finn Hellmann (finn.hellmann@webger)
Anhang: Hellmann_CV.pdf
Dear
Mr Smith
am writing
to apply for the position as wholesale assistant, reference no. 34576, as advertised on the
Wholesale
Jobs website.
In June this year | will complete
a full-time, two-year course in business
and administration at Mendel
Berufskolleg
in Unna, Germany. The course prepares students
for a job in commerce
and industry and
also entitles
them to attend courses in higher education. The course includes English and Spanish
as well
as IT, commercial correspondence
and a work placement with
a local company.
During my internships and in my part-time
job as a sales assistant | gained valuable experience in the
retail and wholesale business and | am confident that the wholesale business is the field | want
to work
in permanently. 1am keen
to work in an international company where | can practise my language skills
and learn more about wholesale. Apart from strong organizational and administrative skills, am a team
player and I believe | would be well-suited for the post you advertised
My CV is attached for your information, and I will be available for an interview at short notice.
Thank you for taking the time to consider my application. | would welcome the opportunity for
an interview.
Yours sincerely
Finn Hellmann
Taking notes
EZ Have | read the whole text?
© Have | scanned the text for key words?
3 Have | noted down the key words?

--- Seite 30 ---
‘Match the beginnings and the endings of the following sentences from different covering letters.
Please find enclosed my CV in application for the post
With reference to your advertisement on the internet on 20 June 20.
Iwas extremely interested to read your advertisement on the internet
4 Ibelieve 1 am particularly suited for the post because I have
5 Asyou can see, I have more than five years’ experience
6 Asanative speaker
of German, I am also
7 During my course at Cologne University,
8 1am available for an interview
I would be able
to start work any time after
10 Thank you for taking the time to consider my application and
advertised in The Local News on 12 May.
at short notice.
completing my course.
fluent in English and Spanish
e forthe post as team assistant
had previous experience in sales.
g Icompleted a three-month internship at a large food store in Berlin.
11ook forward to hearing from you at your earliest convenience.
Iwish to apply
for the post above.
 inadvising customers
Sort the expressions to describe skills and personal qualities into the right category. Then think of
at least two other points in each category.
a fast learner » a good communicator + a positive attitude + a proactive individual
excellent
time management skills - extensive experience in - good interpersonal
skills
meet deadlines - achieve goals - take the initiative - work well under pressure
Ican
thave
a positive attitude
Write down a few strengths and skills you would mention in your own CV.
Use one of the job adverts on pages 16-17 to write your own CV based on the example on page 22
and the expressions you have learned in this unit.
Use the same job advert to write your own covering letter using expressions from this unit.
Use expressive and interesting adjectives to describe your skills.
excellent (communication skills)
+ competent
with (MS Office programs)
outstanding (organizational skills)
+ fluent
in (English)
exceptional (time management skills)
Applications
I was extremely interested to read your advertisement on
the internet / in ... (newspaper/magazine) for the post as
Team Assistant.
Please find enclosed my CV in application for the
post advertised on 12 May.
wish to apply for the post of Administrative Assistant
which was advertised in
a native speaker of German/Polish/Spanish, | am also
fluent in English
Ham competent with / have a good command of all
standard word processing programs.
Ihave excellent verbal and written communication skills.
During my vocational training course, | completed
a three-month internship at a large food store,
‘As you can see, | have more than five years’ experience in
advising customers.
My part-time
job as a sales assistant has confirmed my
interest in the retail and wholesale business.
| believe | am particularly suited for the post because
Ham sure I can support your team and
! am available for an interview at short notice / as from
1 would be able
to start work any time after completing
my course /1 July.
1 would welcome the opportunity for an interview and hope
to hear from you soon.
| would be delighted if you would consider me for this post
and look forward to hearing from you soon.
Welcome to the world of work
Ich habe Ihre Anzeige im Internet / in .. (Zeitung/Zeitschrift)
fur die Stelle als Teamassistent/in mit großem Interesse
gelesen.
‘Als Anlage sende ich Ihnen meinen Lebenslauf zusammen mit
meiner Bewerbung
für die am 12. Mai ausgeschriebene
Stelle.
Ich möchte mich auf die Stelle als Verwaltungsassistent/in
bewerben, die in... ausgeschrieben war.
Als deutsche()/polnische(r)/spanische(r) Muttersprachler/in
beherrsche ich auch fließend Englisch.
Ich beherrsche alle gängigen Textverarbeitungsprogramme.
Ich habe ausgezeichnete mündliche und schriftliche
Kommunikationsfähigkeiten.
Während meiner Ausbildung am Berufskolleg habe ich ein
dreimonatiges Praktikum in einem großen Lebensmittel-
geschäft absolviert.
Sie sehen, verfüge ich über mehr als fünf Jahre Erfahrung
im Bereich Kundenberatung.
Meine Teilzeittätigkeit als Verkäufer/in hat mein Interesse
Einzel- und Großhandel bestätigt.
Ich bin sicher, ich bin für diese Stelle besonders geeignet,
weil
Ich bin sicher, ich kann Ihr Team unterstützen und
Ich stehe Ihnen kurzfristig
/ ab... für ein Vorstellungs
gespräch zur Verfügung.
Ich kann die Stelle jederzeit nach Abschluss meiner Ausbil
dung
/ nach dem
1.Juli antreten.
Gerne komme ich für ein Bewerbungsgespräch zu Ihnen und
würde mich freuen, von Ihnen zu hören.
Ich würde mich sehr freuen, bald von Ihnen zu hören und
mich Ihnen persönlich vorstellen zu können.
Jr oe TE Ho %&-

--- Seite 31 ---
Welcome to the world of work
Laura Schneider recently applied for a job as an office assistant with an international company
and has just arrived for her interview.
Read the dialogue and complete the sentences.
Then listen and check your answers.
Read the text about tips for job interviews. Then match the headings (a-i) to the correct paragraphs.
a apleasure
to meet
e Tilletherknow
a Ask questions
f Prepare your answers carefully
b have an interview
f  ifyouwould follow
b Don't be critical of others
g Research the company thoroughly
© have any trouble
g on your website
Don’t focus on yourself
Think about non-verbal communication
4 Kowanı
Sea ste
d_ Give examples
Use the STAR technique
e Practise your responses
Receptionist:
Good morning, ==" help you?
Laura:
Hello, My name is Laura Schneider. I
m=? with Beth Hogan in HR at 2.30.
Receptionist:
Hello, Ms Schneider,
==> you have arrived.
Successful
job interviews — our tips
Laura:
Thank you.
LAD DLR aici pT
Beth Hogan:
_Hello.I’'m Beth Hogan from HR. Welcome to ECO WORLD.
==+ Laura Schneider.
Preparation is the key to success, so here are a few tips for you.
Laura:
Yes, that’s right. Its ms you, Ms Hogan.
Beth H
Nice
too.
s findi
You want to convince
an employer that you are the ideal person for the job? Then first make sure
aan: | DE Wee ons euee
neue
that you are convinced and show that
you have thought about the reasons why
you are the right
Zauna:
Nö motall The instructions
mi? were very cleat
Beth Hogan:
Good. So, let’s go to my office. It's on the sixth floor, so,
»=* me, please?
person for the roe.
2 Make sure you are ready for typical interview questions by writing down your answers and then
Laura Schneider is having her interview with the recruiter, Beth Hogan. Listen and say which
reading them aloud. It also helps to record yourself
or find someone to do a mock interview.
of the sentences are true or false. Correct the false statements in German.
3 Youcan tell the recruiter that you are good at solving problems or achieving goals, but it is much
better to also support this statement by describing how exactly you did that in a given situation.
Beth Hogan bittet Laura, etwas über ihre berufliche Laufbahn zu erzählen.
Laura hat schon viel Erfahrung im Bereich Verwaltung und Marketing,
Zu Lauras Stärken gehören Flexibilität und Freundlichkeit.
4. Itisnotenough to tell the interviewer that you have had a quick look at the company website.
: 4 Laura hat Angst, wenn sie vor großen Gruppen sprechen soll.
You should be familiar with important facts about the company, such as its products and
Laura möchte sich später vielleicht auf Online-Marketing spezialisieren.
locations, recent news and strategic plans
Die Firma bietet ein Einsteigerprogramm für neue Mitarbeiter.
5 This will show you are interested in the company and want to learn more about specific aspects.
Match the sentences you hear, then listen again to check your answers.
6 The recruiter's
goal is to find the best person
for a position. So instead of telling them how
wonderful you are and why this job is good for your career, tell them what you can offer them
and how you can contribute to the success of the company.
T'm currently doing a two-year commercial course
I would like to work in an English-speaking company to improve
‚And when I saw this job advert, it seemed to match
And I would say I'm good
Ihaven't got much experience of
And I hope to deepen my knowledge in sales and marketing
My goal is to learn everythingIcan
Is there a formal training programme
7 Recruiters usually won't be impressed if you are negative about your current or former colleagues
or employer. You can say you are looking
for a new challenge or give other reasons, but try to
avoid criticizing people.
8 Video interviews have become a lot more common. They often give candidates less time to make
a good impression, soit is even more important to use positive body language to engage with
the interviewer. Sit straight, roll your shoulders back, smile and make eye contact.
oensauaun-
a about this industry over the next few years.
and gain a lot more experience.
at motivating people.
for new employees?
my English and to gain some work experience.
in business and administration.
my skills and qualifications very closely.
working with foreign customers.
9 Ifyou are asked to describe your skills and competences, start with the situation, then the task
you had, after that describe the action you took and finally say what the result was. (374 words)
Für den bevorstehenden „Tag der offenen Tür“ an Ihrer Schule erarbeiten Sie mit einem Partner
einer Partnerin auf der Basis des Textes oben einen deutschen Flyer. Was soll man beim
Bewerbungs-
gespräch tun, was nicht? Fassen Sie die wichtigsten Punkte auf Deutsch zusammen.

--- Seite 32 ---
4 sic}
Read these typical interview questions. Then match the answers below to the questions.
There are more questions than answers.
Tellme about yourself. / Could you take us through your CV?
2 What do you know about our company?
3 What
are your strengths?
4 What are your weaknesses?
5 Where do you see yourself in five years’ time? / What are your plans for the future?
6 Why do you want this job?
7 What motivates you?
8 Can you give me an example of a difficult situation and how you dealt with it?
9 Have you got any questions?
Thope to doa career training programme and work in the London office.
In five years from now,
I see myself / I'd like to be handling my own projects.
Atthe moment, I'm doing a two-year full-time course in
I've been working at .. for ... years. / During my business administration course,
Thad a part-time job as
While Iwas still at school, I did two work placements at
+ Iwould say my ability to work under pressure and deal with difficult people
I'm good at dealing with customer queries / using languages.
T'vealways wanted to work (in) ... and I'm very interested in
Ithink I'ma good candidate for this position because
Icould be better with numbers.
Tmnot very good at
Ithink Ineed to improve
Yes,could you tell me if...
+ Would it be possible to
‘Answer the questions 3-9 from exercise 3A and write down your own answers using the phrases
above. (Imagine you are being interviewed for one of the jobs on pages 16-17 if you wish.)
Work with a partner. Practise a face-to-face interview using phrases from this unit. Agree on one of
the jobs advertised in this unit first, then make notes to prepare the interview before you begin.
Interviewer
Begrüßen Sie den Bewerber
/ die Bewerberin.
Begrüßen Sie Ihren Ansprechpartner / Ihre
Fragen Sie, ob er/sie gut hergefunden hat.
Ansprechpartnerin.
Stellen Sie Fragen zum beruflichen Werde-
Sie haben die Firma gut gefunden dank der
‚gang, was er/sie über die Firma weiß, Stärken
‚guten Wegbeschreibung auf der Webseite.
und Schwächen, warum der Kandidat / die
Beantworten Sie die Fragen zu Ihrem Werde-
Kandidatin glaubt, für diesen Job geeignet zu
gang, was Sie über die Firma wissen, Ihre
sein.
Stärken und Schwächen, warum Sie glauben,
Beantworten Sie die Frage des Bewerbers /
für diese Stelle geeignet zu sein.
der Bewerberin.
Stellen Sie selbst eine Frage.
Sagen Sie, dass Sie innerhalb der nächsten
Bedanken Sie sich und fragen Sie, wann Sie
Woche anrufen werden.
mit einer Antwort rechnen können.
Verabschieden Sie sich freundlich,
Verabschieden Sie sich freundlich
[=] EQUAL WAGES - BUT NOT FOR EVERYONE
You are going to watch an interview with Henrike von Platen, an activist for equal pay and the founder
of Fair Pay Innovation Lab.
Before watching
the video match the phrases in the
list to the correct explanations.
equal pay for equal work + gender wage gap +
glass ceiling + sticky floor - pink-collar jobs
Onaverage, women stay longer in low-level
positions and must wait longer for promotions
than men.
2 Women often cannot progress beyond a
certain point on the career ladder. They are
not promoted to the highest levels of a
company or they only reach these levels
with great difficulty.
3 Pay disparity (the difference between men
and women’s average wages) is often
represented as a percentage.
4 Everyone who performs the same job should
be paid equally.
5 Jobs in sectors that are considered traditionally
‘female’ are low-paying or even unpaid
Now watch the video. Which of the phrases from exercise 1 are not mentioned?
Read the following questions. Then watch the video again and answer the questions.
1 What is the difference, globally, between the average salaries of men and women?
How large is the gender wage gap in Germany?
How large is the gap after factors like childcare and part-time work have been taken
into account?
4 What is an example of unpaid work?
5_ Why are‘high-touch’ jobs such as childcare paid less than ‘high-tech’ jobs such as car
maintenance or repair?
On average, how much more work do women do than men? How much of that is unpaid?
7 Why is the decision to stay at home with the children not a real choice?
EI witha partner, discuss ways in which companies can combat the gender wage gap. Use the ideas in
the list to help you or come up with your own ideas. Which ideas do you think would be effective?
Why or why not?
flexitime - pay transparency - quotas
for women in leadership roles - free childcare during school
holidays + remove indications of gender from job applications

--- Seite 33 ---
Read the following text and answer the questions in German.
aunsun-
FOCUS ON WORDS
Job areas
and responsibilities
Was hat die Studie ergeben?
administration (infml: admin)
Verwaltung
ADJ administrative
Wie wirkt sich die Art der Stellenanzeige auf das Interesse der Bewerber aus?
to advise sb
‚jdn beraten
N advice Rat(schlag/-schläge)
assistant
Assistent/in
personal assistant Chefassistenz
Was sollten Arbeitgeber in ihren Stellenanzeigen besonders herausstellen?
Weshalb sollten Arbeitgeber die ausgeschriebene Stelle möglichst umfassend beschreiben?
Was erwarten Bewerber, die eine neue Herausforderung suchen?
Inwiefern sind Sprache und Formulierungen in einer Stellenanzeige wichtig?
How smart employers attract
the best job applicants
According
to recent research, many job advertisements provide hardly any, or at least not enough,
customer service
to deal with sb/sth
tofile sth
to give a presentation
HR (Human Resources)
management
marketing
to report to sb
Work experience
Kundendienst
sich um jdn/etw kümmern
etw archivieren, etw ablegen
einen Vortrag halten
Personalabteilung
Geschäftsleitung, Geschäftsführung
Marketing, Vertrieb
jdm unterstellt sein
customer service adviser Kundenbetreuer/in
to deal with complaints
to do filing; to file records
to give a presentation on sth to sb
HR manager Personalleiter/in
management skills Führungsqualitäten
V to market sth etw vertreiben.
<> to be in charge of sb; N report Bericht
information about what the employer
can offer job applicants. The study found that only three
internship
Praktikum
to do an internship
out often job advertisements give enough details about the company’s work environment
opportunity
Möglichkeit
to have the opportunity to do sth
traineeship
Ausbildung, Volontariat
to complete a traineeship
Many jobseekers, however, are looking
for relevant information about their potential employer
right from the start. In fact, the more details
that are provided in the job advert, the more likely it
is that jobseekers will apply for the position as they feel valued and appreciated. A detailed and
appealing
job advert should provide information on corporate culture and working time models as
voluntary/community work
work placement
ehrenamtliche/freiwillige Arbeit
(Schul-/Ausbildungs-)Praktikum
Terms of
employment / Working conditions
N volunteer (Person)
to doa work placement
well as salary and any additional benefits. Authentic photos and videos of the company's premises
annual leave
Jahresurlaub
to take leave Urlaub nehmen
can be helpful too.
benefits pl
Zusatzleistungen, Zuwendungen
= perks; to offer a benefits package
conditions pl
Bedingungen
working conditions
If you want your company to be more attractive for potential employees, the following tips will
Fer:
help you to become
more visible.
employee
Arbeitnehmer/in
employer Arbeitgeber; employment
‘Talk about your strengths as an employer
Beschäftigung
What kind of benefits
can future employees expect? include information that may convince
flexitime
Gleitzet
© fixed working hours
applicant to choose you as an employer. Describe what you have to offer
to future employees.
full-time
Vollzeit-
<> part-time Teilzeit-;
to have a full-time
Mention things such as flexitime, working from home, a company kindergarten, travel vouchers,
per annum
Pro Jahr
= annual
a good canteen, etc.
permanent
unbefristet
<> temporary
Chie
canvillates
en Ulan
ofen
thay
work
profession
Beruf
ADI professional beruflich
ive the candidates
an idea of where they will wor
to recruit sb
idn einstellen, jdn anwerben
to recruit new staff
Employees
spend a large part of the day in the office so they want to know where
they will work
and what the workplace looks like. Is your company located in the city centre with good transport
leat
satel
Connections? itn an industrial park with lots of parking spaces? Do you have modern open-plan
shortterm
kurzfristig
<> long-term
offices or small private offices? Each location has different advantages that may affect
a potential
cece
Kane
tale sek
any eh kronEenyeben
employee's decision to apply
termination
Kündigung
toterminate a contract
cleanly det
evel
CVs and job applications
learly
define responsibilities and development perspectives
application
Bewerbung
to apply for a job sich für eine Stelle bewerben
What most people are looking for when they apply for a new job is
a new challenge. So always
course
Kurs
to take
a course einen Kurs belegen
give a clear
and detailed description of the tasks and responsibilities
for each position in your job
advertisements. Opportunities for further training and professional development
should also be
decibel
interview
Vorstellungsgespräch
to be called for / have/attend an interview
Be arbeitende
Stelle
job description Stellenbeschreibung; job fair
len!
ning
Stel
Don't use the same (empty) phrases that everyone else uses! Stand out from
the crowd by providing
Sielienbitee:
opening
Jun) jene ee
a lot of detail and using
clear wording, Make sure the candidate's tasks and responsibilities are
opened
len,
described in such a way that the jobseeker clearly understands his
or her future role. This will
strengtiy
Se es ess made
make your job advert more authentic and motivate jobseekers to apply.
(897 Wörter)
university entrance qualification
Hochschulreife, Abitur
ADI qualified ausgebildet
vocational training
Berufsausbildung
to receive vocational training

--- Seite 34 ---
Put the pictures below in your order of personal preference.
Discuss your choices with a partner.
Either: 8 a.m. —+4 p.m
every day
Or: Different working
hours cach day
b small company
© regular/irregularhours
d good pay
© promotion
# social responsibility
g childcare
h your own ideas
A reporter from Radio Europe is talking
to students
ftdanacallenwand
 Typiatnuiberet
from four countries
about their working conditions.
national holidays
working hours
working days
per week
Work with a partner. Which countries from the
list below do you think match numbers 1-4 and
Wi paid annua
5-8 in the two graphs? Give reasons.
Germany + Japan - United Kingdom
United States
i Po)
Hi rad notags
Listen to the podcast and check your answers.
Now copy the table and complete it with the details you hear.
Look at the photos. Where would you like to have a meeting
— in a coffee shop or cafeteria, in an
open-plan office, in a conference room or on the floor, sitting on a beanbag? Talk about your
Name
Nationality Age | Job/Occupation | Paid leave | Paidnational | Working hours
preferences
with a partner.
holidays
Discuss in class what sort of workplace you would like to work in.
LANGUAGE HELP
Jack
Ina cafeteria / an open-plan office the atmosphere is relaxed/(in)formal/(un)friendly/creative/.
4 | Takeshi
I like to work in an office where the atmosphere is...
and the working hours are regular/flexible.
If the atmosphere
at work is/isn't.., you (don't) feel comfortable / at ease / you can/can't be
creative
‘An open-plan office is a more/less productive/relaxing/creative place to work because
conference room is better/worse than a...
because
Work in groups and brainstorm what makes a good or a bad workplace. Make notes.
Use your notes to write a short description of one good and one bad workplace.

--- Seite 35 ---
In the workplace
How balanced is your life? Find out by following the instructions below.
Your vocational college is taking part in an international project called ‘Working conditions’. You find an
online work-life balance tool.
Copy the diagram or use a worksheet.
Brainstorm the eight most important factors in your life
Use the ideas in the list
to help you.
Luke’s blog: Keeping your life in balance
When you're busy it's very easy to focus on one or two things and to
appearance - boyfriend - club - clothes - community
computer + cooking - culture + diet + education
entertainment + environment « family + fitness « food
friends - gaming - girlfriend - health - helping others
hobbies » homework - money - my room/flat « pet
politics - religion - shopping - smartphone - social
media - sport - team - other ideas
forget the rest. That’s why I've developed a tool to help you find out
where your life is off balance. Let me show you how
| used it to make
some changes in my life
First, | drew a wheel with eight spokes. Then | brainstormed the
eight most important factors in my life and wrote them on the eight
spokes of the wheel (entertainment, friends, social media, etc).
After that | gave each factor a score from 0-10 to show how much
3 Write the factors on the eight spokes of the wheel.
4 Now give each factor a score from 0-10 to show how much time you devote to it. Mark each score
on the spoke of the life balance tool.
5 Nowjoin up the marks around the wheel. Are there big gaps? Is your life balanced? Are you
spending too much or too little time on some things?
6 Mark the ideal level of attention for each factor on the wheel.
Look at the areas with too little attention. How can you pay more attention to them?
LIFE BALANCE TOOL
8 Now lookat the areas with too much attention. Are they really so important? Can you spend less
time on them?
time
| spend on it
| then marked each score on the corresponding spoke of the wheel
(friends = 8, social media = 10, etc)
After that | joined up the marks around
the wheel.
I studied the wheel
and saw some big gaps. This showed
that | focus on some things a lot more than on others.
So, looked at the factors that don't get much attention,
such as homework or my girlfriend. | asked myself a
couple
of questions: How important are they?
Can | give
them more attention or just leave
them as they are?
entertainment
Next
| looked at the factors | spend a lot of time on, such
as fitness and social media. Are they really so important,
or can I spend less time on them?
I thought about the ideal level of attention that all the
factors
on the wheel should get and then | marked them
Put a copy of your life balance diagram without your name on the wall of your classroom. Compare your
results with the other members of the class. What are the trends for the following factors?
boyfriend/girlfriend
friends
homework
with new scores in
+ dlothes
and shopping
hobbies
social media
Finally, I decided on a plan of action to correct the
imbalance
and started straightaway. The first thing
Tnoney
did was
Complete the text below with the right form of the verbs in brackets.
Use the simple present or the going to future.
Luke ==" (spend) a lot of time streaming videos with his friends. He ==: (watch) series on his new
Read the blog and answer the following questions.
How balanced was Luke's life?
How much less time is he going to spend on social media?
smartphone, but he ss: (reduce) his screen time by 50% because he often
==+ (get) into trouble with
his teachers about homework. He and his two brothers sss (not get) much pocket money
from their
parents, so Luke ms
(get)
a weekend
job giving out leaflets. He ==? (not spend) so much time on
fitness
in the future and, instead, he ==® (spend) more time with his girlfriend.
2. Which factor got the most attention from Luke give?
How much time did he find
for his hobbies?
Pers
4. Whut did he spend least time on?
Now write a similar description of yourself. Write about 100 words and include the following points:
5 How many changes does Luke want to make to his work-life balance?
+ what you doa lot and perhaps too much
what you do to the right extent
6 How much time does he want to devote to entertainment?
+ what you do a little and perhaps not enough
+ what you are going to do in future
How much more time does he plan to allocate to homework?
| spend a lot of time
...-ing (e.g. shopping) but
| don’t spend much time on ... (e.g. sport).

--- Seite 36 ---
Describe the illustration below in a few sentences.
Skim the article and decide which of the following it is about:
a findingajob
the German railway network
b_finding and keeping employees
d_ Berlin nightclubs
Work-life balance is out
Young employees will only stay at firms offering ‘work-
Nowadays, it's so hard to find people to work at
German companies that they are offering new
employees longer holidays, shorter working
hours, flexible shifts and sabbaticals. This is
happening in a country where people already
have the shortest working hours of all developed
countries.
When Deutsche Bahn, one of the country's big
gest employers, offered its workforce a choice
between six days extra paid holiday, a 2.6% pay
rise ora one-hour cut in the working week, most
(58%) chose the extra holiday. That meant that
Deutsche Bahn workers who already got 30 days
paid holiday a year increased this total to 36.
Only 2% of employees chose Deutsche Bahn’s
offer of
a one-hour cut in working hours because
German workers already have one of the short
est working weeks in the western world. OECD“
statistics show that in 2016 the average German
worked 1363 hours per year. In the other
35 OECD
countries,
the average working hours were 1,763
per year with the US at 1,783 and Mexico leading
ife-life balance’.
Life life Life
What young people really want
Work is no longer the top priority for young
people today. 82% of large German companies
are finding it extremely hard to recruit new
staff, in particular engineers, skilled workers
and technicians. On a recent visit to Berlin, a
billionaire businessman commented that Berlin
was a ‘work-life-life-life’ capital because young
people there were more interested in having a
good time at night clubs than building their
careers at work
(257 words)
Match the highlighted words and expressions in the article to the German words (1-10).
Arbeitgeber
Industriestaaten
2 Belegschaft
Milliardär/in
durchschnittlich
8 Personal
4 Facharbeiter/innen
9 Sabbatjahre
5 Gehaltserhöhung
10 Schichten
| SKILLS CHECKLIST |
ig with unknown words
5 Have | read the whole sentence to.
understand its general meaning?
In the workplace
Erklären Sie die Bedeutung folgender
Sade ieee Tea De
In English,
you write decimals with a point, not a comma
0.25 = oh/nought point two five (BE), zero point two five (AE)
You use commas or spaces (and not a point) after the
thousands
or millions in large numbers.
1563, 765 = one million, five hundred and sixty-three
thousand,
seven hundred
and sixty-five
Study the three points of view below and write a short comment on them. Discuss the advantages and
disadvantages in each case and say which one is closest to your own opinion about how to balance
work and free time.
tion:
Rollenbasierte
Abigail Johnson, 55, Human Resources Director,
McMeekin Engineering Ltd
Our company has an excellent reputation as a manufacturer of first-class
engineering products. Our employees take pride in their work. This is
not just a nine-to-five
job.
Ed Hardy, 31, Sales Representative,
Malleret Fashionwear
I have a sales target every month and I have to reach it. This sometimes
means late nights, weekend work and time on the road living out of a
suitcase. But | try to see my wife and the kids as much as possible and
we have a good standard of living
Fiona Bell, 19, Apprentice Wholesaler,
Henderson Electronics international
Work isn't everything. Yes, of course, we all have to work but I don’t want
to be like my dad, who even went into the factory when he was ill. He was
proud of that, but | think he was stupid. People should work for about
30 hours
a week and be free
for the rest of the time.
ing a comment
© Have | included arguments for and against?
©] Have | stated my own opinion?
© Havel checked for grammar and spelling mistakes?

--- Seite 37 ---
Your vocational school is taking part in an international project called
“Working conditions’. The aim of the project is to exchange information on working conditions
in the 21st century with partner schools throughout Europe.
Scenario support, S. 183
Im Rahmen Ihrer Recherchen zum Thema ‚Working conditions“ finden Sie einen Podcast,
in dem die Arbeitsbedingungen zweier Paketzusteller
einander gegenübergestellt werden.
Übertragen Sie die Tabelle und hören Sie sich den Podcast an. Ergänzen Sie die untenstehende Tabelle
mit Informationen aus dem Podcast.
Working conditions.
Kenneth
Hours per week
Hours per day
Hourly rate
Piecework
yes O ro O
yes O no O
Extra pay for nights, weekends, national holidays
yes O nm
Sick pay
Holiday pay
Christmas bonus
Holiday bonus
Medical insurance
Job security
Vehicle owned by employer/courier
Fuel paid for by employer/courier
Bei Ihren Recherchen zum Thema finden Sie einen Artikel über die Arbeit eines Paketboten
in Großbritannien.
In the workplace
Mission impossible?
The truth about being an online delivery driver
Revealed: delivery giant Hermes pays some couriers less than living wage
Britain's second-biggest parcel company, Hermes,
which delivers for John Lewis and other major
retailers, is paying some of its couriers at levels
equivalent to below the national living wage
according to a snapshot of information provided
by some of those who have worked there.
[..] Hermes does not need to pay its couriers the
£720 an hour living wage introduced in April
because they are self-employed. [..] One self.
employed courier for Hermes provided evidence
that suggested she took home approximately
£5.90 an hour over two weeks of recent work and
another showed invoice data that indicated she
earned no more than £6.70 per hour.
A third courier provided estimates that she
earned £5,50 per hour over nine days. All three of
those who delivered parcels said they worked six
days a week, from three to six hours per day.
‘Two couriers also showed the Guardian accounts
from 12 months of work. One calculated he had
eared about £7.30 per hour in the last tax year
and that was without any paid holiday or sick
pay and without pension contributions. Another
earned about £6.90 per hour over the same year.
Hermes said that according to its calculations,
based partly on its own estimates of the time
needed to deliver parcels, none of its couriers are
‘earning below the ‘national
living wage’ It said it
is monitoring several hundred couriers who it
believes are earning “around £7.20 per hour to
ensure they do not drop further’
Hermes has contracts with 10,500 people paid
on a piecework basis to deliver parcels using
their own cars. Dubbed ‘lifestyle couriers, they
are self-employed and so do not receive any paid
holiday, sick pay, parental leave or pension
contributions.
They pay for their own fuel and car insurance
but are free to take other jobs and have some
flexibility over their working day. They are part
of the fast growing ‘gig economy’ in which big
companies, including Hermes, rely on increasing
numbers of self-employed contractors, who are
not subject to the national living wage, to deliver
their core services.
(858 words)
Source: www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/18/
+hermes-couriers-paying_staff-less-than-living-wage
Lesen Sie den Text und beantworten Sie folgende Fragen auf Deutsch.
Rezept
Wie hoch ist der existenzsichernde Mindestlohn in Großbritannien?
Scenario support, S. 184
ICh 2
2. Wo liegt
der übliche Stundenloh:
Hermes-Paketzustellers
im Vergleich zum Mindestlohn?
Se IS ASAI
IRN PCLT RRR aaa
Es wird eine Webseite für das internationale Projekt „Working conditions“ eingerichtet
Wie umgeht Hermes die Notwendigkeit, den Mindestlohn
zu zahlen?
Hier können die teilnehmenden Schulen die Ergebnisse ihrer Projektarbeit mit anderen Schulen teilen.
4 Welche Freiheiten genießen „lifestyle couriers" bei Hermes?
Welche Nachteile hat eine Tätigkeit als „lifestyle courier“ bei Hermes?
Verfassen Sie einen Kommentar in englischer Sprache zum Thema „The pros and cons of the gig economy“.
Sammeln Sie zunächst die Vor- und Nachteile aus Sicht des Arbeitgebers und des Arbeitnehmers und
legen Sie anschließend Ihre persöi
Rollenba:
J- GF T BB BO A.

--- Seite 38 ---
In the workplace
fifo)
‘Scenario support, 5.184
Sie finden einen Artikel zum Thema „Trends auf dem Arbeitsmarkt.
You are one of several students from all over Europe doing a work placement at SensorTech Stern Solutions
Ltd, where
the company language is English. On your first day, you meet six heads of department and are
given an organization chart of the whole company.
Schreiben Sie eine kurze Zusammenfassung auf Englisch unter den angegeben Überschriften, damit Sie
später Ihren internationalen Partnern über den Inhalt des Artikels berichten können.
Mediation,
Trend towards freelancing
Meaning of the term ‘gig economy’
Advantages for employers
Formalities, hourly rates and flexibility
Insurance, car maintenance costs, shifts and payment unclear
Gig-Economy: Selbststandig unselbststandig
Selbstandig sein? Unabhangig? Den Arbeitstag
nach den eigenen Vorlieben planen? Willkom
men in der neuen digitalen Arbeitswelt, in der
jeder sein eigener Unternehmer sein kann und
umständliche Bürokratie der Vergangenheit an
gehört: Einfach App runterladen, beim Anbieter
registrieren, und schon lockt ein Verdienst an
geblich weit über dem Mindestlohn von aktuell
9,19 Euro pro Stunde.
Und so sieht man sie längst durch die Stadt flit-
zen: die Essenkuriere von App-basierten Diens
ten, deren Auslieferer mit dem eigenen Fahrrad
fahren müssen, oder Paketzusteller, die ihr Privat-
auto nutzen, um Bestellungen auszufahren.
Diese Selbständigen hangeln sich von Auftrag
zu Auftrag und sind damit Teil der sogenannt-
en Gig-Economy. Der Begriff Gig stammt aus
der Musikszene und bezeichnet eigentlich den
Auftritt von Musikern, wobei der Auftraggeber
sie nach Leistung und Bedarf beschäftigt und
bezahlt
Schon seit vordigitalen Zeiten umgehen Unter-
nehmen unangenehme Arbeitgeberpflichten, in-
dem sie beispielsweise Paketboten nicht festan-
stellen, sondern zu Subunternehmern machen.
So spart das Unternehmen Sozialkosten, und die
Boten sieht man dann ihre Pakete im Laufschritt
zustellen.
Ein amerikanischer Internet-Handelsriese über-
trägt dieses Prinzip nun ins Zeitalter der Gig-
Economy mit einem eigenen Zustelldienst: Selbst-
ständige sollen mit ihrem Privatauto Bestellun-
gen ausfahren. Bedingung ist, dass man voll-
jährig sein, einen Führerschein und ein Smart-
phone haben muss. In Aussicht gestellt wird ein
„Stundenlohn bis zu 25 Euro“, und die geforderte
Flexibilität diene dazu, „mehr Zeit zu haben, Ihre
Ziele und Träume zu verwirklichen”.
Dies klingt natürlich alles großartig, lenkt aller-
dings davon ab, dass die Unternehmens-Website
weder über den genauen Abrechnungsmodus
noch über Versicherungsregelungen oder Unter-
haltskosten für die Fahrzeuge informiert. Außer-
dem ist keine Vollzeittatigkeit garantiert, da die
Schichten schwanken können. Vielmehr wird der
Verdienst als Zusatzeinkommen angepriesen, das
man sich locker nebenher in der Freizeit erwirt-
schaften kann. Bleibt abzuwarten, ob die Gig
Economy das Beschaftigungsmodell der Zukunft
werden wird.
(295 words)
TeEo%
Match these job descriptions to the correct department in the organization chart on pages 42-43.
A Our focus is on people. We recruit, train,
help and support employees. We advertise
jobs and interview candidates. Sometimes,
we promote our own employees to higher
positions.
B Our team maintains, repairs and
replaces our company's products
and systems to make sure that our
customers’ production lines never
stop.
© We invoice customers for our
goods and services. We also deal
with cash flow, taxation and draw
—| D Wefind out what the customer
is looking for and sell them the most
up balance sheets showing income
suitable product in our range. Our
and expenditure.
goal is to increase turnover and
give customers what they want.
E We manufacture state-of:
the-art products with the
greatest efficiency using
highly trained staff.
F My department buys the materials
needed for our products. We find suppliers
who will deliver
just in time, so we don’t
need to waste valuable warehouse space.
Eight more people talk to you about their work. Use the organization chart to find out who is speaking.
Iwork alongside one other colleague. We both report to the head of department and are in
charge of one apprentice. | know. That’s one of the buyers in the Purchasing Department.
2 Iwork alongside seven other colleagues. We have two colleagues above us and they report
to the head of department.
3 I'msupervised by one of the five manufacturing engineers.
My colleague and I are responsible for paying the employees’ salaries. We report to the head
of department,
5 My three colleagues and I report to our head of department and we take turns to supervise
one commercial apprentice.
6 My colleague and I report to the head of department and have eight managers and four
apprentices under us.
7 My three colleagues and I have six technicians under us and they look after three technical
apprentices.
8 My colleague and report to our immediate boss, the head of department. We have no apprentices.

--- Seite 39 ---
In the workplace
SensorTech Stern Solutions Ltd
Organization chart
Administration
MANAGING DIRECTOR (MD)
John Backer, PA
Anne Chapman
4staff
DEPART- [- Head of Sales
[Head of Production
Head of
_ Head of Service
HeadofHuman
Head of
MENTS
Steve Hope
Tamara Butina
Purchasing
and Maintenance
Resources
‚Accounting,
Roswithe Berg
Esra Solak
Franz Beck
Maja Bukowski
U 2senior sales
_ 4development
tants
p Managers
2 buyers
4 senior
1assistant
L 2assistants
1bookkeeper
technicians
2 payroll clerks
Kevin Koch
— [ecole anaes
— apprentice
Yannik Fuchs
Vanessa Richter
apprentice
Natalie Klein
apprentice
6 technicians
apprentice
|_ Aleksandra Bosko
__ Smanufacturing
apprentice
engineers
|_ Max Lange
apprentice
Jan Nowak
Nadine Rötz
apprentice
apprentice
|_ Sven Harmann
apprentice
he lkun
U 6 product
© An apprentice (Auszubildende/r, Lehrling) is a person
I cerca
__ engineers
learning
the skills and knowledge needed for a job by
combining classroom learning with in-company training
| Lea Fischer
during an apprenticeship. A trainee (Auszubildende/r)
apprentice
can be any person doing some sort of training.
|_ Anastasiya Stoppel
The person who is directly in charge of the work and training
Hasan Demirct
apprentice
of an apprentice is their line manager (direkte/r Vorgesetzte/r)
apprentice
or supervisor (Vorgesetzte/r, Ausbildungsleiter/in).

--- Seite 40 ---
report to the MD and I'm in charge
Work with a partner. Without giving a name or an exact job
eure
of fourteen people. Who am I?
description, use the expressions below to ask about four
people in the organization chart.
above - alongside - be in charge
of - look after - report
be responsible
for - supervise + be supervised
by - under
I know. You're Steven Hope,
Head of Sales.
The MD tells
you that SensorTech Stern Solutions Ltd is a private limited company but the parent company,
SensorTech Stern plc, is a public limited company. You do some research about different company forms
and find the following definitions.
pes of business
orgar
Three ways to do business
UK: Sole trader
US: Sole proprietor
+ The company belongs to the sole trader.
+ The sole trader takes decisions alone.
+ He/She
gets all the profit.
+ He/She could lose everything.
UK: Private limited company (Ltd)*
US: Limited liability company (LLC)
+ The company belongs to a closed circle of
members.
+ The members decide what is best for the company.
+ The members share the profits.
+ The members can only lose the money they have
invested.
UK: Public limited company (plc)
US: Corporation (Corp./Inc.)
+ The company belongs to the shareholders, who are
members of the public.
The directors decide what is best for the company
and the shareholders.
The shareholders share the profits.
The shareholders can only lose the money they
paid for the shares.
In the workplace
Study the three descriptions on page 44 then complete the sentences with a, b or c.
The person who bears most risk is
4 Ashareholder
ina ple
a amember of a private limited company
a bears
all the risk
b asoletrader
b_ gets all the profit
© ashareholder
in a public limited company
© gets some of the profit
2. Aprivate limited company is owned by
5 Members of the public
a the members
a can buy shares in a private limited company
b the public
b can buy shares in a public limited company
© asoletrader
© canbuy a sole trader's business
3 Asoletrader
6 An American corporation
is similar to
alittle
freedom to make decisions
a aple
b_ the least freedom to make decisions
b aPtyLtd
the most freedom to make decisions
anlic
What sort of company should the people below invest
or set up? Study what they say and then
recommend a suitable type of company. Give reasons for your choice.
Jim: | have some extra money and | want
to invest it in a company, but I certainly
don't want to be involved in the day-to-day
running of the company or take decisions.
| just want my money to work for me and
give me some extra income.
Helen: I'm good at painting and
decorating, and I'm happiest
working alone. | want to be my
own boss, and I'm happy to work
six or even seven days a week to get
the work done. | don't like taking
orders from someone.
Priti: Computers, programming,
troubleshooting, installing soft-
ware and cybersecurity systems is
what I'm best at. All my friends ask
me for help, and now companies
are asking me to do work for them
too. | could work around the clock,
but I need people to take charge of
the bookkeeping, the advertising
and the financial side of the work,
so Ican focus on what I do best.
Natasha: | have financial skills and many
‚years of experience in the import/export
trade, and I've also got some capital. 'd now
like to take an active part in the day-to-day
running ofa company and get a share of the
profits, but | certainly don't want to join a big,
faceless organization owned by thousands of
people | don’t know.
Will: | worked in a boutique after school and liked it. In fact, | was good at selling but
always felt that the shop could do better. | had lots of ideas, but nobody was really
interested in them. I'd like to do things my way now and I'm not afraid of hard work!
Ifit all goes right, Ill make a profit and if it all goes wrong, I’ take the consequences!
Jr oe TE Ho %&-

--- Seite 41 ---
In the workplace
telecommuting means employees can work from home if they have internet access; driverless vehicles
SensorTech Stern Solutions Ltd is a subsidiary of SensorTech Stern plc and will soon be restructured as a
are now reality; robots can do both industrial and domestic work; artificial intelligence (Al) is doing
result of globalization. You are not sure what globalization is, so you look for some information online.
work once only done by humans; apps can translate instantly and reliably from one spoken language to
another; telepresence technology means that people at one location can seem to be at another,
eg. at
an international conference. The result is that more and more service jobs can and will be transferred
file)
to low-wage countries,
and our life and culture will change again.
(353 words)
Look at the four pictures about globalization and write one or two sentences about each one.
The letters in picture # stand for ... The illustration shows how
Picture B has a map of ... and there is also
Compare your notes with a partner.
Lesen Sie den Text und beantworten Sie die Fragen dazu auf Deutsch.
Sli diel tet Aa) anid match the pictures (A=0) wath the fois stages of goballzation:
Welcher Zeitraum liegt zwischen Phase 1 und Phase 2 des Globalisierungsprozesses?
Welcher Zeitraum liegt zwischen Phase 2 und Phase
3 des Globalisierungsprozesses?
In welchen Zeitabständen finden in Phase 4 Veränderungen statt?
Auf welchem Wege gelangten Waren traditionell nach Europa?
Wie wirkte sich der Frieden nach dem Zweiten Weltkrieg auf den internationalen
Warenhandel aus?
6 Warum verloren in der dritten Phase der Globalisierung viele Beschäftigte im Westen
ihre Arbeitsplätze?
7 Welche technologische Neuerung zu Anfang der vierten Phase machte die Kommunikation
zwischen allen Ländern der Welt möglich?
8 Welche Arbeitsplätze im Westen sind jetzt durch den schnellen technischen Wandel in
vaun-
Phase 4 gefährdet?
The four stages of globalization
Stage 1: For many centuries international trade was a slow process. European trade with Asia was
overland along the Silk Road, and with the Americas, Africa, India, Australia and New Zealand it was
Work with a partner and write definitions of these words from the text.
mainly by sailing ship. Only small quantities of goods could be imported, and it took centuries for
Don't look in the vocabulary list!
explorers and colonizers to establish the sea routes that were later used by trading companies, such as
the East India Company (1600) and the Hudson's Bay Company (1670)
Word
Stage 2: In the 1950s, when peace came after the Second World War, international transport and
1 | centuries (line 1)
Meaning of ‘cent’?
communications were no longer restricted and soon far larger quantities of goods were traded
2 | Americas (line 2)
Why is there an‘s’?
internationally, mainly from east to west. Western brands (e.g. fast food or coffee chains) and culture
3 | peace (line 6)
It came after the Second World War.
(e.g, Hollywood movies or western music) also established themselves all over the world.
4 | restricted (ine 7)
How free are transport and communications
when there is war?
Stage 3: As early as the 1970s, large western manufacturing companies started moving some of their
5 | domestic (ine 20)
Some robots work in factories but where do some others work?
operations to low-wage countries to save on labour costs. By the 1990s, it was standard practice for
companies to manufacture goods cheaply in Asia and sell them at a much higher price on the western
Copy
and complete the tables with words from the text. Make any necessary changes.
market. Western countries therefore concentrated on services, and millions of manufacturing
jobs
Noun
Adje
Verb
Noun
Stage 4: In the 1990s, scientists connected computer networks and produced a huge, interconnected
pricy
SS coRTITInICatE
network (the internet) covering
the whole world. Massive advances were also made in computing
communications technology, resulting in smartphones and tablets with internet access. Now in the
21% century, new inventions are changing society every two years; internet speeds are increasing
intelligent
translation
technological
to locate

--- Seite 42 ---
In the workplace
Now use pairs of words from exercise 38 to complete the sentences. Make any necessary changes.
Scan the text before reading it in detail and list the low-wage countries and continents mentioned.
A The World Wide Web was == by Tim Berners-Lee in 1989.
B His es changed the world.
2 A Before then, electronic == had been by fax.
Will globalisation take away your job?
8 Now people == by email and message services.
3 A Computers are used in trade and = all over the world.
Technological advances could now mean white-
8 = output would collapse without computers.
collar, office-based workers and professionals
4 A Some computers are cheap but others are very
are at risk of losing their jobs, says Prof Baldwin,
B Some people are prepared to pay a very high = for a good product.
who has been studying global trade for the past
5 A Thenew systems use artificial
30 years,
8 Sooner or later = computer systems with robots will take over from humans.
Protectionist trade barriers won't work in
6 A Factories will not need to be = near a town or city with a pool of workers nearby.
the 21% century, he says. “Knowledge crossing
8 Robots aren't interested in the == of their factory.
borders in massive amounts [is the] big new dis
7A Itisn’t easy to = quickly from one spoken language to another.
ruptive thing”
8 However,
new apps can provide
a quick == when someone speaks into a smartphone.
It's going to help people in Africa and Asia
1.]"Allyou need is more computing power, more
A. Mobile phone == has changed our lives.
compete more effectively with people in the
transmitting power and cheaper robots ~ and all
8 Many more = advances will follow.
West, as communication advances mean workers
that is happening”
Security guards in US shopping malls could
be replaced by robots controlled by security
personnel based in Peru, and hotel cleaners in
Virtual migration
Europe could be replaced by robots driven by
Developing world labour costs can bea tenth of
staff based in the Philippines [..)
what they are in the West, says Prof Baldwin.
“They can't get here to take the jobs but technol-
ogy will soon allow virtual migration, thanks to
telerobotics and telepresence.”
Ever-faster internet speeds [which are] be-
coming globally more widely available, coupled
with the rapidly falling prices of robots will allow
workers, for example in the Philippines or China,
toremotely provide services toa country
like the
in the developing world will be able to control
robots to do jobs in Europe and the US at lower
cost,
he says.
You find an online article about the future of traditional office work. It describes how technology is
affecting globalization and will change how we work. Here are some of the ideas discussed.
Robots rise
[.] A typical industrial robot can cost about £4
an hour to operate, compared to average total
European labour costs of about £40 an hour-or
£9 an hour in China. And robots are getting
cheaper to buy and are increasingly able to do
more complex tasks. This means the increased
use of robots is also threatening millions of jobs
in developing countries
16 words)
UK - where the [service] sector accounts for
Telecommuting is an
Machine translation
Teleroboticshasmade
Telepresence uses
about 80% of the economy.
Source: www.bbc.com/news/business-38600270
arrangement in which
usestextandspeech
itpossibletouserobots _ hirtech systems to
employees do nottravel
recognitiontotranslate
in surgery; the first
make a person feel as
toacentral place
of work.
instantly from one
transatlantic operation- _if they were present
Instead,
they work from
language to another.
with the patient in
or give the appearance
aplace of theirchoice,
Appsarenowavailable
Franceandsurgeonsin
of being present at a
for example at home,
that give good transla:
the US - was carried
distant location, for
Read the text and answer the following questions.
Rezeption: Leseversteh
using telecommunica- _
tions fromone spoken
outin 2001.
‘example a conference
1 Who might soon lose their jobs asa result of globalization?
tions technology.
language to another.
in another country.
2 What will soon move from one country to another in great quantities?
3 Where will the new cheaper workers be based?
Study the four examples (A-D) of modern technology and match them to the following scenarios.
4 How much cheaper BI 60 employ workers in Asia arid Attica?
5 How will workers in other countries overcome the problem of long distances?
1 AGerman businesswoman flies to Shenzhen in China and asks the way to her hotel.
6 Why is it now much easier to provide services in places that are a long way away?
2. Aheart specialist in Munich operates on a patient in Rome.
7 How much cheaper is human labour in China than in Europe?
3 Delegates from all over the world attend a conference in Berlin without leaving home.
8 How much cheaper is an industrial robot than a worker a) in China b) in Europe?
4 Icy weather stops an office worker from driving to work for three months a year.

--- Seite 43 ---
In the workplace
Collocations are words that are often used together. Match words from box A with words
from box B to make collocations. They are in the same order as in the text.
You work in the Human Resources Department at SensorTech Stern Solutions Ltd.
A white-collar + trade + labour + widely
8 vailable + barriers + costs + countries
As part of a company reorganization programme, some operations are going to be outsourced abroad.
rapidly - computing - shopping
falling - malls « power « robot - tasks
industrial - complex + developing
workers
Use some collocations from exercise 7A to complete the text.
Thanks to advances in modem technology computers have far more
=" and modern systems can
now handle big data. This has helped industry because
==: can perform
==> but only cost a few
euros an hour. They are also ==+ in western countries
and their price is
Nevertheless, western employers still spend a lot of money on
==, but in ==? they are much
lower. Soon, however, cheaper workers in these countries will be able to do the work of expensive
western == by using remote-controlled robot assistants.
Scenario support,
Study the cartoon and describe what is happening
in it.
Ask yourself if the boss is the human or the robot
Auf einer außerordentlichen Betriebsversammlung gibt Geschäftsführerin Anne Chapman die
and outline the advantages and disadvantages for the other worker in each case.
Auslagerung mehrerer Geschäftsbereiche an einen externen Dienstleister bekannt.
nalysieren,
X) _ Hören Sie zu und machen Sie sich auf Englisch zu den folgenden Punkten Notizen, damit Sie später in
einer Diskussionsrunde über die geplante Auslagerung berichten können. » Rezeption:
Hörversteh
neuer Markt für die Produkte von SensorTech Stern Solutions Ltd
Auswirkungen des neuen Marktes auf die Produktion bei SensorTech Stern Solutions Ltd
Zahlungsmethoden, die von den Kunden am neuen Standort verwendet werden
‚Abteilungen und Arbeitsplätze, die ausgelagert werden sollen
Name des externen Dienstleisters
Anzahl der betroffenen Arbeitnehmer/innen
was mit den betroffenen Mitarbeiter/innen geschehen soll
Zeitplan für die Auslagerung der Abteilungen und Arbeitsplätze
ob die Produktion ebenfalls ausgelagert werden soll
| SKILLS CHECKLIST |
Describing cartoons
© Have | read the caption under the
cartoon or any speech bubbles
carefully?
Have | described everything | can
see in the cartoon?
© Have
| used the present
progressive
to say what people
Bei der Recherche über Kosteneinsparungen, die durch Auslagerung erzielt werden können,
are doing?
finden Sie einen Artikel über das Lohngefälle zwischen Asien und dem Westen.
vonsaunsun-
Scenario support, 5.185
Lesen Sie den Text auf Seite 52 und machen Sie sich auf Deutsch Notizen zu folgenden Punkten.
In the cartoon we can see ... / The cartoon shows
Inthe upper/bottom left-hand right-hand corner of the cartoon there is a
There
is a large speech bubble at the top right of the cartoon. It says...
The cartoonist seems to be making the point that
um welche Länder es sich handelt
wie der Software-Entwickler seinen Arbeitstag gestaltete
wer seine Arbeit verrichtete
wie der Betrug aufflog
was entdeckt wurde
wie lange der Mitarbeiter seinen Arbeitgeber betrog
wie viel der Software-Entwickler für die Auslagerung seiner Arbeit zahlte
Sausun-
Jr oe TE Ho %&-

--- Seite 44 ---
US employee ‘outsourced job to China’
A security check on a US company has [..] re-
"The company
had discovered
the existence of an
vealed [that] one of its staff was outsourcinghis
open and active VPN connection from Shenyang
work to China.
to the employee's workstation that went back
hs, Mr Valentine
said.
‘The software developer,
in his 405, [..]spenthis
Valentine
workdays surfing the web, watching cat videos
‘Investigation of the employee's computer re-
on YouTube and browsing Reddit and eBay.
vealed hundreds of PDF documents of invoices
(.] paid just a fifth of his six-figure salary to
om the Shenyang contractor, he added.
a company based in Shenyang to do his job.
The employee, an ‘inoffensive and quiet’ but
talented man ‘spent less than one fifth of his
six-figure salary for a Chinese firm to do his job
for him’, Mr Valentine said.
[The auditing company] Verizon says the scam
came to light after the US firm asked it for an
audit, suspecting
a security breach
‘Authentication was no problem. [..]. The third-
party contractor could log in under his creden-
tials during the workday. It would appear that
he was working an average nine-to-five work
day, he added.
According to Andrew Valentine, of Verizon, the
[-] company requested the operator's risk team
last year to investigate some [..] activity on its
virtual private network (VPN) logs.
‘This organisation had been slowly moving
toward [..] more telecommuting [..], and they
had therefore started to allow their developers
to work from home on certain days. In order to
accomplish this, they'd set up a fairly standard
The employee no longer worked at the firm, Mr
VPN [connection]:
Valentine said
(800 words)
[..] He earned several hundred thousand dollars a
year, and only had to pay the Chinese consulting
firm about $50,000 (£31,270) annually.
Source: www.bbc.com/news/technology-21043693
Scenario support, 5.186
Die Buchhaltung von SensorTech Stern Solutions Ltd soll ausgelagert werden, weil die neuen
Kunden in China mehrheitlich elektronische Zahlungssysteme nutzen. Sie recherchieren „Fintech“
(von financial technology) im Internet und finden folgenden Artikel über moderne Technologien im
Finanzdienstleistungsbereich
Fassen Sie
die wichtigsten Punkte des Artikels auf Seite 53 unter den angegebenen Überschriften für
die anderen Praktikanten und Praktikantinnen bei SensorTech Stern Ltd in englischer
Sprache zusammen.
ation,
Germans slow to accept fintech
2 Farhigher usage of fintech in developing than developed countries
3 New world vs old world technology
4 WhatsApp vs WeChat
In the workplace
Fintech-Nutzung in Deutschland und der Welt
Wir Deutsche gelten gern als Technikmuffelund
[Aber] warum liegen vor allem hochentwickelte
Modernisierungsverweigerer, zumindest wenn
Länder weiter hinten und die Aufsteigernatio-
es um die Nutzung von Online-Diensten geht.
nen der letzten zwei Dekaden so weit vorn?
Das gilt besonders bei sensiblen Bereichen wie
der Geldanlage, der Kontoverwaltung und dem
Zahlungsverkehr. [..] In anderen Ländern schei
nen diese Sorgen deutlich weniger präsent zu
sein. Dort werden Geldgeschäfte fast nur noch
vollständig online abgewickelt
Der Hauptgrund für eine deutlich häufigere Nut-
zung von Fintech-Lösungen in Schwellenländern
liegt vor allem darin, dass [wir] noch mit Desk-
top-PCs und Festnetzinternet aufgewachsen sind,
wahrend fiir viele Chinesen und Inder der mo
bile Netzzugang via Smartphone der natürliche
erste Schritt ins Internet ist.
digital aktiven Bevölkerung die Dienste von Fin
tech-Anbietern. Ähnliche Zahlen werden
für das
13 Milliarden Einwohner zählende Indien gelten,
wo [..] 52% der digital aktiven Einwohner ihre
Geldgeschäfte online abwickeln. [Es] folgen Groß-
britannien mit 42% ‚Brasilien mit 40%, Austra
lien mit 37% ‚Deutschland mit 35 %, USA mit 33%,
Südkorea mit 32% und Japan mit 14%.
[Dort hat sich] das Smartphone zum universalen
Werkzeug für alle möglichen Alltagsherausforde
rungen herausgebildet. Eines der bekanntesten
Beispiele dafür ist die chinesische Messenger
App WeChat. Dabei handelt es sich inzwischen
nicht mehr um ein bloßes Pendant zum hier-
zulande populärsten Dienst WhatsApp. Im chi
nesischen WeChat können die Nutzer nicht nur
chatten, sondern Taxis, Lebensmittel oder Essen
bestellen, Restaurant- und Stromrechnungen be
zahlen, Sticker kaufen, Jobs oder Leute in der
Anteil der Fintech-Nutzer
an der Gesamtbevölkerung
Senne, Ch
Nähe suchen, Arzttermine buchen, Spiele spielen
£2 Croßbrtannien
und eigene Mobile-Stores betreiben. WeChat ist
40% Brasilien
also nicht bloßes Kommunikationsmodul, son-
dern Payment-Lösung, Buchungs-Tool, Online-
Shop und Fintech-Anbieter in einem. (271 words)
Source: www.kapilendo.de/magazin/fintech-nutzung:
in-deutschland-und-der-welt
14% Japan
Die Auslagerungspläne von SensorTech Stern Solutions Ltd lösen unter den Mitarbeiterinnen
und Mitarbeitern heftige Diskussionen aus. Sie recherchieren Kommentare dazu im Internet und finden
folgenden Beitrag
Obwohl beim Bezahlen per Smartphone keine Gebühren für den Bezahlenden anfallen und das Telefon vor dem
Kauf entweder mit Gesichtserkennung, Fingerabdruck oder PIN-Eingabe entsperrt werden muss, gaben in einer
Umfrage der Bundesbank drei von vier Befragten an, dass sie ihre Einkäufe in bar begleichen.
Verfassen Sie einen Kommentar in englischer Sprache über die Vor- und Nachteile des Bezahlens per
‘Smartphone und begründen Sie, weshalb Sie dieses Verfahren für sicher bzw. für bedenklich halten.

--- Seite 45 ---
SensorTech Stern Solutions Ltd is very aware of climate change and wants
to reduce its carbon footprint
and emissions in as many ways
as possible. You realize you need more background information and find
the following article online.
Skim the article then choose a suitable heading (a~f) for each paragraph (1-5). There is one more heading
than you need.
a Consequences of global warming
d Technology to stop global warming
b Explanation of carbon footprint
e The importance of greenhouse gases
© Howa greenhouse works
f Why there is global warming
1 To understand why your carbon footprint is so important, you first need
to understand how
a greenhouse works and what greenhouse gases are.
A greenhouse is a building with a roof and walls made
of glass in which
plants are grown. The glass lets in light from the sun. When sunlight hits a
solid surface, eg. earth or plants, it turns into heat. The darker
the surface,
the more heat is produced. Light enters the greenhouse through its glass
walls very easily. The heat it produces takes a lot longer to escape through
the glass of the greenhouse, so the greenhouse warms up.
rounded by greenhouse gases (mainly water vapour and carbon dioxide,
but also methane, nitrous oxide and ozone) which let the sunlight in quickly
but let the heat out slowly. Without greenhouse gases the temperature
on the Earth would be about
~18 °C. Greenhouse gases give us our climate
and, thanks to them, the average temperature of the Earth is about +15°C.
2 Instead of being surrounded by glass like a greenhouse, the Earth is sur-
3 For thousands of years there was a natural balance between sunlight,
animal life, forests and oceans, but since the Industrial Revolution (1750)
more and more carbon dioxide has entered the atmosphere because fossil
fuels producing carbon dioxide are used to power industry and transport.
Carbon emissions have increased by 45% since 1750, with the result that
‘more and more heat is trapped in the atmosphere and the Earth is warming
up. This is known as global warming,
4 Every person on the planet produces a so-called carbon footprint. This
is the total amount of the greenhouse gases, including carbon dioxide,
produced by everything that person does, uses and consumes. This means,
for example, what they eat and drink; the clothes they wear; the means
transport they use and how often they use them; where they work; where
and how they live; how the products they use are manufactured; what life-
style they have.
In the workplace
5 Inthe opinion of prominent scientists
and the United Nations, if we do
not reduce our carbon emissions drastically, the Earth’s surface temperature
will be 2°C higher by 2036. The result will be more extreme weather
conditions such as hurricanes
and droughts; animal and plant life will be
endangered; the polar ice caps will melt even faster than is already the
case and low-lying
areas will be flooded. For this reason, itis important
understand our carbon footprint and reduce our carbon emissions, so the
Earth's temperature does not rise by 15°C, after which the consequences
(424 words)
will be irreversible.
To structure the information more clearly, you write notes under the following headings:
Examples of greenhouse gases
Greenhouse gases, climate and temperature
Lifestyle and global warming
Consequences
of inaction
Reasons for global warming
Point out what will happen if we do nothing to stop global warming. Use conditional sentence type 1
and the words in the box in a sentence chain to warn of the consequences.
Start like this:
If we burn more fossil Fuels, we'll produce more greenhouse gases.
If we produce more greenhouse gases, the atmosphere will
If the atmosphere
we / burn more fossil fuels > we / produce more greenhouse gases >
the atmosphere
/ become hotter > the Earth / become too hot >
the polar ice caps
/ melt > water levels / rise > low-lying areas
/ be flooded >
the population / move to other areas > they
/ be overcrowded >
the people there / fight each other
Now make all your sentences negative.
If we don’t burn more fossil fuels, we won't produce more greenhouse gases.
If we don’t produce more greenhouse gases, the atmosphere won't
Create some more sentence chains starting like thi
IF the earth's temperature rises, there will be more hurricanes and droughts.
If there are more
If we don’t use planes and cars with petrol or diesel engines,

--- Seite 46 ---
In the workplace
Match words from box
A with words from box B to make collocations. They are all in the text.
You plan to spend your next holiday in the Spanish seaside resort
of Malaga but are concerned about
reducing your carbon footprint when making the round trip of
4,500 km from North Rhine-Westphalia
A animal » carbon (2x) - fossil - global - green-
B balance - caps - emissions - footprint - fuels
to Spain and back.
house - ice + Industrial + natural + surface
gases «life - Revolution + temperature - warming
Use the diagram below to write about the pros and cons of the different modes of transport
(plane, car, coach, train) when travelling (a) with one other person (b) in a family of two adults and
two children. State which
mode of transport you would choose in each case and give reasons
Before the ==" in 1750 there was a
=? between man and nature, and the average w=’ of the earth
for your choice.
hreib
analy:
was 13.5°C. Now, in the 21* century, it is 15°C because of the use of =» such as coal and oil in
industry and transport. This is because since the 18" century,
==s have increased by 45% and the
Use some collocations from 4A to complete the text.
levels of ms¢ in the atmosphere have risen dramatically. As a consequence, we now have the
Time, cost and carbon emissions
problem of ==7,which is melting the polar
==® and changing our climate. Everyone can help find
per person for travelling
a solution by reducing their
==, but this will mean a radical change in lifestyle.
1680 kg CO,
ponte Spaced texan
"price and emissions
per person
with one person in vehicle
2 price and emissions
per person
SensorTech Stern Solutions Ltd now plans
to open a factory in Shenzhen, China and transport its products
with four people
in vehicle
from Shenzhen to Hamburg. The company forms a team to compare different modes of transport.
Work with a partner and compare the different modes of transport in terms of time, price, distance and
carbon emissions. Write at least two sentences about each mode of transport. Use words and expressions
gen,
from
the box to help you.
Ahıs
2TOkgCO,
Time, price, distance and carbon emissions
130 kg CO,
for a 100 kg load with a volume of 3 m?
1 3 100 kg load with
a volume
4,635 kg COp
8 days
39 days
uss281
522 kg CO,
| LANGUAGE
HELP |
465 kg CO,
The value in the first/second/... column is far greater/less than
The value for...
is twice as much as
is four times as big as / half the size of,
has the highest lowest value/figure for
Describing graphs and statistics
3 Have | read the headings, labels and any other explanations carefully?
| LANGUAGE HELP |
© Have | checked that | understand the units (e.g, euros, kilograms of CO,) that the
Transporting
the goods by road would be most...
fast + expensive + further/furthest + long/longer/
figures are presented in?
Sending
the goods by air would be faster but...
longest distance - harmful
to the environment
3 Have
| compared the values
for the different categories (e.g. forms of transport)?
Sea/Rail/Road/Air transport is least .. but
more/most/less/least carbon dioxide - reliable

--- Seite 47 ---
SensorTech Stern Solutions Ltd is planning to outsource part of its production
to Asia, but the company first wants to take into account the effects on the environment of
transporting goods regularly from the Far East to Europe.
Sie finden einen Podcast über die schwedische Klimaschutzaktivistin Greta Thunberg, die 2019
auf dem Weltwirtschaftsforum in Davos an die Industrie appellierte, ihre CO,-Emissionen zu senken,
Hören Sie zu and machen Sie sich zu den unten aufgeführten Punkten Notizen auf Englisch, um diese später
in einer Videokonferenz mit den ausländischen Niederlassungen zu verwenden.
how Greta Thunberg travelled to Davos and how long it took
the deadline after which it is too late to stop climate change
the percentage by which carbon emissions must be reduced
+ what gases we must stop producing
the degree of warming that will produce an irreversible chain reaction
anexample of an irreversible change
+ how we must change our lifestyle
the feeling about the future that Greta Thunberg wants to produce in adults
Scenario support,
Die Videokonferenz mit den ausländischen Niederlassungen über die Folgen der Produktions.
auslagerung von Deutschland nach Asien zeigt, dass immer noch nicht alle von der Notwendigkeit einer
ökologischeren Ausrichtung des Unternehmens überzeugt sind. Sie möchten daher auf die weltweite
Klimaschutzbewegung hinweisen und bereiten eine E-Mail an die Kolleginnen und Kollegen vor. Dazu
finden Sie einen Zeitungsartikel im Internet.
Lesen Sie den Text auf Seite 59 und machen Sie sich Notizen zu folgenden Punkten:
die Reaktionen von Polizei, Regierung, Eltern auf die Schulstreiks
2 welche Aktionen die Streikenden unternommen haben
die Forderungen der streikenden Schülerinnen und Schüler
4 die Darstellung der Streiks in den sozialen Medien
In the workplace
Children are hauled away in HANDCUFFS as they
bring roads to a standstill during a nationwide day
of ‘strikes’ against climate change
Thousands of schoolchildren hit the streets of
Britain today as they went on strike from school
THERE
weed
to protest over climate change — but the Prime
is NOMS
Minister slammed them for ‘wasting lesson time’.
Youngsters walked out of lessons for the Youth
Strike 4 Climate protests in 60 towns and cities
across the UK from Comwall to the Scottish
Highlands, leaving many parents concerned
climate
actior
Parents have been divided on social media over
whether their children should go on strike one
day before half-term, amid concerns over the
walkouts in London being hijacked by hard-line
climate groups and career activists. (.)
they would face a £60 fine for truancy...)
Some schools backing the protests posted pic
tures on social media of their children attending
rallies, while Devon County Council said it ‘fully
Young people boarded an open top city tour _ welcomes and supports the aims of young people
bus, climbing
to the top deck and bringing roads__across the UK’ today.
in the area to a standstill. Hundreds of pupils,
holding signs, chanted ‘We're not moving’ as
they blocked traffic from moving.
‘Among the banners held by pupils holding
demonstrations across the country today were
‘global warming isn't cool; ‘there is no Planet B,
Students want the government to declare a
‘when did the children become the adults’ and
climate emergency and take active steps to
‘don’t bu our future’.
(299 words)
tackle the problem, tell the public more about
the size of the ecological crisis and reform the
Source: www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-6707907/
curriculum so it is an educational priority. (.)
Youth -Strike-4-Climate-protests-place-Britain.htm!
Die Geschäftsleitung von SensorTech Stern Solutions Ltd ist immer noch unschlüssig,
ob die
‚Auslagerung der Produktion nach Asien der richtige Schritt ist. Daher bittet Sie Ihr Vorgesetzter, weitere
Informationen zu den Vor- und Nachteilen des Outsourcings
zur Verfügung zu stellen. Sie finden einen
Artikel über Auslagerung aus Sicht des Arbeitgebers.
Fassen Sie die wichtigsten Punkte des Artikels auf Seite 60 unter den angegebenen Überschriften in
englischer Sprache zusammen.
+ Which companies outsource
Examples of successful outsourcing
+ Benefits
of outsourcing
+ Disadvantages
of outsourcing
Which departments can be outsourced

--- Seite 48 ---
BJ] WORKING ON
A CITY FARM
OUTSOURCING: Der flexible Weg für Mittelständler
Outsourcing ist längst gängige Praxis in kleinen
und mittelstandischen Unternehmen. Und das
mit gutem Grund: Werden ausgewählte Aufgaben
an externe Dienstleistungsunternehmen abgege-
ben, können Sie in zweierlei Hinsicht profitieren.
- _ Stärken Sie Ihr Kerngeschäft und ermöglichen
Sie Ihren Mitarbeitern und Mitarbeiterinnen,
sich auf das Wesentliche zu konzentrieren.
Sparen Sie langfristig Kosten, indem Sie
Dienstleister ans Werk lassen, welche die
Arbeit schneller, effizienter und oftmals
besser verrichten können. (..)
Outsourcing-Vorteile ergeben sich in mehreren
Gebieten: Gängige Bereiche, die Sie einem ver
trauensvollen Kooperationspartner in die Hände
geben können, sind
 dasIT-Wesen,
das Human-Resource-Management,
die Logistik,
die Buchhaltung und
das Gebäudemanagement.
Auslagerung:
Überlassen Sie es den Profis
Ein Spezialist arbeitet in der Regel effektiv und ef-
fizient. Einer der Outsoureing-Vorteile ist deshalb,
dass Aufgaben extern besser erledigt werden kön-
nen als durch interne Maßnahmen Folglich steigt
bei Auslagerung die Qualität der Arbeit. (..)
Ist beispielsweise der Drucker defekt, kann ein
ungelernter Mitarbeiter Stunden damit verbrin
gen, das Gerät wieder zum Laufen zu bringen.
Die Tüftelei kostet Ihre Firma Zeit und Geld.
Fällt der Server aus, dürfte selbst der ambitio
nierteste Hobby-Techniker mit seinem Latein
am Ende sein. Ein Profi hat das Problem im
besten Fall mit wenigen Handgriffen gelöst,
ohne Arbeitsabläufe zu verzögern. (..)
Outsourcing-Nachteile: Es gibt auch Risiken
Führen Sie sich Outsourcing Vorteile vor Augen,
sollten Sie selbstverständlich ebenfalls die Nach-
teile der Auslagerung kennen. Dazu gehören
Abhängigkeit vom Dienstleister und
zusätzlicher Kommunikationsaufwand.
Um die Outsourcing-Vorteile zu genießen, bege-
ben Sie sich in eine Abhängigkeit, das bedeutet:
Macht Ihr Dienstleister einen Fehler oder
hater Probleme, müssen Sie die Misere unter
Umständen ausbaden.
Sobald Ihr Partner die Preise anhebt, müssen
Sie zahlen, selbst wenn Sie mit anderen Kos-
ten gerechnet haben.
Betriebsgeheimnisse sind nicht mehr so
sicher wie vorher. (..)
Ein weiterer potenzieller Stolperstein: die Kom-
munikation. Bereits intern ist es keine leichte
‚Aufgabe, sich verständlich, präzise und korrekt
zu verständigen. Bei einer Auslagerung von Auf.
gaben an einen externen Kooperationspartner
wird es sogar noch schwieriger. Vor allem, sobald
sich Gesprächspartner nur übers Telefon oder das
Internet austauschen.
(342 words)
Source: https:/Jdigitaler-mittelstand.de/trends/
ratgeber outsourcing-vorteile-und-nachteile-von:
auslagerung-3198/Telekom Deutschland GmbH
Before watching
the video match the words in box A with the German translations in box B.
A back-breaking work - irrigate - fertilizer -
B bewassern « Düngemittel - Diirre - Erde -
growth - pesticides - farming pests +
Ernte + gestapelt - Klimawandel - Knochenarbeit -
drought « to ruin + harvest + stacked +
Luftschutzbunker + Milliarde + Nährstoffe +
soil - circulate - nutrients - environment -
ruinieren - Schädlinge - Schädlingsbekämpfungs-
roots - contamination - polluted +
mittel - Umgebung + umlaufen - unabhängig
regardless of - billion « bomb shelters «
von + verschmutzt + Verunreinigung - Wachstum +
climate change
Wurzeln
Read through the six statements below then watch the video and say which three are true.
Conventional farmers usually work in teams.
Conventional farming uses large areas of land.
City farms offer a clean and pleasant working environment.
City farms need good soil and a lot of sunlight.
City farms are more productive when the weather is good.
City farms can be built in many different kinds of building
auawn
Read through the tasks below then watch the video again to complete them.
Find words to describe the job of a conventional farmer.
List what conventional farmers put on their fields to make the plants grow better.
Name the two factors that can ruin a whole harvest.
Say what a city farmer wears at work.
Explain how city farms save space
State what is added to the water that circulates in the system.
Explain why hydroponic farming does not pollute the environment.
Say where two-thirds of the world’s population are expected to live by 2050.
Verfassen Sie eine Stellungnahme zum Thema „Outsoureing production“ in englischer Sprache.
Give some examples of buildings that can be used for hydroponic farming.
Diskutieren Sie mindestens zwei Vor- und zwei Nachteile eines solchen Schritts aus Sicht des Unter-
Describe how hydroponic farming affects food transport miles.
nehmens und aus Sicht der Arbeitnehmer und legen Sie anschließend Ihre persönliche Meinung dar.
roduktion:
Rollenbasierte
Stellungnahme,
EI Discuss with a partner why you would/wouldn'tlike to be a)
a conventional farmer or b) a city farmer.
Scenario support, 5.187
Vor der Entscheidung über die Auslagerung eines Teils der Produktion nach Asien bittet
SensorTech Stern Solutions Ltd alle betroffenen Mitarbeiterinnen und Mitarbeiter
um ihre Meinung.
vosausun-
Jr oe TE Ho %&-

--- Seite 49 ---
2 FURTHER FOCUS
FOCUS ON WORDS
Alisa, a new colleague, is shadowing one of the accountants in the Accounting Department.
Company form/structu
El Read or listen to the dialogue and note down the following information:
caper
eng:
the difference between the Finance Department and Accounting Department
director
Geschäftsführer/in
Managing Director (MD) Hauptgeschäfts-
the three documents that the Accounting Department creates
führer/in
the two important types of data the Finance Department collects
parent company
Muttergesellschaft
subsidiary Tochterunternehmen
 Alisa:
Good morning Mr Williams and thanks for letting me shadow you.
Eee ee ata
Williams:
That's no problem. Would you like to know something about the job in general?
[peice Ine ay
eorperation (aarp ine |g
Aiea
ves" Ense Trash want ts La aka ee
ande eRe
shareholder
Aktionärlin
to buy shares
in sth Anteile von etw kaufen
Williams:
Well, OK. But first of all, this is the Accounting Department not the Finance Department.
CASS
i eee
es ea Oe Or
‘Alisa:
Oh,1 see. What's the difference?
Job titles and responsibilities (see also page 31)
Williams:
Put simply, the Accounting Department tells the management what the company has
accountant/bookkeeper
(Bilanz-JBuchhalter/in
N accountancy, accounting, bookkeeping
done with its money up to now and the Finance Department decides
how the company
apprentice
Auszubildende/r
N apprenticeship
will spend its money in the future
tobe in charge of sb/sth
{fir jdn/etw zuständig sein
to be responsible for sb/sth
Alisa:
And you check what the company has done with its money?
Kalegelin
Te worker
Williams:
That's right and to do so we create three documents: the balance sheet, the income
oud of department
Atkeilungsieter/in
aa SIE int sae acree SchUnatter i
statement and the cash flow statement. Do you know what they are?
pana
Alisa:
Not really.
to supervise sb
{dn betreuen, jdn anleiten
N supervisor Vorgesetzte/r
Williams:
‘The balance sheet tells you how much the company owes and owns. What a company
Se nal err
owns is called its assets. They can be intangible or tangible.
Alisa:
I'm sorry, don't understand.
Working conditions
Williams:
Intangible means non-physical items, such as patents, copyrights, trademarks, software,
hourly rate
Stundensatz, Stundenlohn
to be paid an hourly rate
internet domains and trade secrets. Tangible means physical items, such as inventory,
irregular working hours
unregelmäßige Arbeitszeiten
<> regular regelmäßig
land, buildings, machinery, vehicles and equipment. The sum of these two figures is
job security
Arbeitsplatzgarantie
to guarantee
job security
(pumas seme
medical insurance
Krankenversicherung
= health insurance
Alisa:
So that’s very important, isn’t it?
pay rise
Gehaltserhöhung
to receive a pay rise
Williams:
Yes, very. The accounting department collects data in order to prepare the three documents.
promotion
‚Beförderung
to promote sb jdn befördern
Two very important types of data are accounts receivable and accounts payable
self-employed
selbstständig
= freelance freiberuflich
Alisa:
I'm sorry. Could you explain the difference?
wage
Lohn
minimum wage Mindestlohn
Williams:
All right, so accounts receivable means money coming into the company. In practice,
white-collar worker
Büroangestellte/r
© blue-collar worker (Fabrik-Arbeiter/in
it means invoices for goods and services. When an invoice has been sent, the accounts
Globalization
receivable team books the revenue on an income statement, whichis often called the profit
== ine Ser
even eae ES aay io
yet in the equines s um ei
gern
Waren einführen
Steamer peaks
DEV Sec Bele GR Se
ects
labour costs pl
Lohnkosten, Arbeitslöhne
labour force / workforce sg Arbeitskräfte
they contact the customer and ask for payment. When payment comes in, it's reported on
low-wage country
Niedriglohnland
low-wage earner Niedriglohnempfänger/in
the cash flow statement.
to outsource sth
etw auslagern
N outsoureing Ausgelagerung (der Produktion)
Alisa:
So that's really important.
Williams:
Yes, and as I said, the other type of data is accounts payable. This means the money that
goes out of the organization to pay for salaries and wages, supplies and raw materials.
ADJ outsourced ausgelagert
Environment
It means the organization's expenses. The last document is the cash flow statement. It tells
bon dicaxice:
Kohlendioxid (CO;)
carbon emissions CO,-Emissionen; carbon
footprint CO,-Fußabdruck/-Bilanz
you how much cash a company has and how much it needs to pay at a moment in time.
‘osical
It's a financial snapshot really. Well, I think that’s enough to start with. We now need to
ease
N ecology; eco-friendly umweltfreundlich
check some invoices
environment
Umwelt
to protect/damage
the environment
fossil fuels p!
Jossile Brennstoffe
to burn fossil fuels
El Match the highlighted words in the text with the German words and expressions in the list.
greenhouse gases pl
Treibhausgase
greenhouse effect Treibhauseffekt
overcrowded
überbevölkert, überfüllt
population Bevölkerung
‚Ausgaben - besitzt - Bilanz + Einnahmen « Forderungen an Kunden  Geldflussrechnung « Gewinn-
Baden
polen Verengung
Verlustrechnung + schuldet - Verbindlichkeiten gegenüber Lieferanten - Vermögen - Warenbestand
durch Plastikabfall

--- Seite 50 ---
You are going to listen to a podcast about the results of a spending survey.
Before you listen, match the phrases with the correct percentages.
almost half
2 one fifth
shes
one out of every
4 three quarters
one ineight
Now listen and complete the pie chart with the mi: RE
IF WE WANT OUR BRAND
CUR MESSAGE HASTO BE
Ph gurcmermons
"AUTHENTIC,
How teenagers spend
their money
Food
Clothing
& footwear
BH Movies, music
& events
Video games.
Books
& magazines
Transport (car, bike, public)
Electronics
Personal care & cosmetics
Others
Is the young generation in Germany similar or different to the young generation in the United States in
how they consume products and services?
You are going
to learn about Generation Z in the USA and then
Draw a pie chart like the one above showing how you spend your money. Compare your pie charts
find out the answer to that question yourself.
small
. Discuss
ith th
its.
SEE GE NESS
I pS STIS
Read the introduction below and then form four groups
and do the tasks in the Files.
The new generation of consumers
‘Manufacturers and providers of products and services need to know their market, and a growing part
of the market is Generation Z. This generation should not be confused with millennials. Millennials
RECERIOGHNIT DUES AOE
are the generation born roughly between 1980 and 1995 who know what the world was like before
the internet reached into every part of our lives. Generation Z, however, who were born after 1995,
only know a world where the internet and mobile technology is normal and a fact of life. For this
generation there is no distinction between online and offline: just as your arms and legs are parts of
your body, the internet and the real world are simply parts of your everyday experience. So, let's get
to know this generation of Americans better in terms
of how they consume products and services.
Look at the cartoons opposite. Describe one of them to your partner.
Anadvertisement that tells the truth! That's something new.
2 Nothing lasts for long these days.
3 Exactly! We buy too much stuff that we don’t need!
4 That's not fair
on the store!
Discuss these questions in pairs or small groups.
1 How would you rank the cartoons in terms of how funny you think they are?
Group A: Look at File 1 on page 198. Group B: Look at File 6 on page 201.
2 Which aspects of modem retail and marketing do you think the cartoonists are
Group C: Look at File 8 on page 202. Group D: Look at File 5 on page 200.
commenting on?

--- Seite 51 ---
Look at the pictures. Do they show a product, a service or both? Discuss your ideas with a partner.
Read the text below and match the headings (a-f) to paragraphs (1-5). There is one heading you
do not need.
a Istherea relationship?
b_ Finding a way to stand out from the crowd
Locking in loyalty
d_ Canyou touch it?
e Does the product improve your image?
They want to get to know you better
Product or service — is there a difference?
1) The first and most basic difference is that a
product is tangible. It is
a physical thing you can
touch or hold that a company made, or grew,
to sell to you. A service, on the other hand, is
something that you pay a company to do for you.
As such, it is not something you can touch or
hold It is intangible. (While banks and insurance
companies may advertise their products, in
reality they offer financial services and are
included in the services industry)
2) Products are designed and manufactured,
or grown, to meet a particular need. You need
a hammer? Go into a hardware store and buy
one - your need is met. Services should also
meet a customer's needs, but - and here is the
big difference - you, the customer, cannot
separate the service or yourself from the service
provider. There is a relationship between you
and the service provider, and that relationship
is key. A good service provider should use that
relationship to get to know its clients better
and be ready to tailor its service quickly to its
customers’ changing requirements.
TEEo
3) Intoday's world, itis hard to tell products apart.
Think of your smartphone
—is there really some-
thing your phone can do that a friend's phone from
a different manufacturer cannot? Probably not.
Some phone makers experimented with custom-
izable smartphones where users could choose
different hardware modules, but the increased
costs in materials and multiple production lines
made it too costly. Instead, in an attempt to stand
out from the crowd, manufacturers have turned
to the services that they can bundle with their
products, because services, being intangible, are
much cheaper and easier to modify. This has led
to the distinction between product and service
becoming almost meaningless.
4) This is the concept of a product as a service.
This idea sees products as gateways to the
‘ecosystem’ of related services provided by the
manufacturer and its strategic partners. Based
oncurrent technological developments,
this trend
is only going to continue. Television makers today
not only want you to buy their latest ultra-high-
definition flat screen, but they also want you
to sign up for the subscription TV and game
streaming service which comes pre-installed
on the smart TV. And who needs a separate TV
remote control when you can download the TV
manufacturer's free smartphone app that will do
it for you? As we enter the age of the Internet of
Things, every electronicitem bought, whetheritis
a bedside lamp, refrigerator or washing machine,
provides an opportunity for a company to estab
lish an ongoing relationship with the purchaser
and leam more about their customers toimprove
their services and also find out what other
products or services they could need.
5) As part of this effort, manufacturers
are turn
to the loss-leader strategy that supermarkets
have long used, i. selling a popular product at a
Products and services
very low price to attract customers in the hope
that they purchase other items on their shopping
list. Manufacturers offer their core products at
lower prices on the condition that you sign up to
pay a monthly or annual fee for the other services
they offer. Printer manufacturers, for example,
make a short-term loss on their printers, but a
longer-term profit on the extra services they
provide such as ink replacement or over-the-air
printing. This has the added benefit of ‘locking
in’those customers for longer periods
—a form of
guaranteed brand loyalty. This can also mean
that the retailer is removed from the relation
ship with the customer, helping the producer to
strengthen its direct relationship with consumers
through its own website.
(ext)
© Ecosystem describes the plants and creatures that live in a particular area. The word can also be
used to describe the extra services and products that are connected to, and only work with, a technology
company's core systems and platforms.
‚Answer the questions on the text.
What, according to the writer, is the biggest difference between a product and a service?
Why did phone makers decide not to offer phones that customers could tailor to their needs?
What opportunity does the Internet of Things give companies?
Why do some companies sell their physical products
at very low prices?
Discuss these questions with a partner.
What do you prefer to do:'buy and walk away’ or‘sign up’? Say why.
Do you or your family have products that belong to an ecosystem? If so, give examples.
Do you think you have a relationship with any manufacturers or service providers?
Give reasons for your answer.
Find words in the text which mean the same as these German words:
Dienstleister
5 Abonnement
9 Verlust
Beziehung
6 Lockvogelangebot
10 Gewinn
Produktionsstraßen
7 anlocken
1 Nutzen
Portal
8 jährliche Gebühr
12 Einzelhändler

--- Seite 52 ---
Products and services
‘Match the words
to make collocations used
in the text.
ESTER PO SPT
The team at Inspiration (see exercise 48) are holding their first meeting with an advertising agency,
tell
tosb’s requirements
Messaging Ltd,
to give them an overview of the latest product
they are developing. You are doing
more people come together at a particular
2 manufacture
b aneed
internship with Messaging
and you have
to take notes on the new product.
= garcia
place and time. However, it can also be used
in many collocations
with nouns such as to
Copy the table below. Listen to the first part of the presentation and note down the missing
dimensions.
4 tailorsth
the difference between sth
© aielatonstity with
meet expectations or to meet objectives to
say that they have been reached.
power/function LED:
6 establish
forasubscription
Now use the collocations from exercise 3B to fill in the gaps in the text.
on/off button
1 Customers
who == for an annual == will receive
a free gift.
2 80% of people who tried the two leading cola drinks couldn't == between them.
standard blue/black
Wess
our = from 100% recyclable materials.
ink refill
4 Whatever your business needs are, our experts can == our software solutions to your
5 Ifyou do not == your clients’ ss, you will soon find that you have no clients!
6 If you want
to == an ongoing = with your customers, offer them the chance
to receive
an email newsletter.
Dimensions
Features and components
battery - Bluetooth™ antenna
Length:
camera + flash memory - infrared
Taken
light » microphone - USB socket
Look at this company profile and complete the analysis with the missing information.
Weight:
Company profile: WriteStuff
Analysis:
WriteStuffis
a retail chain
Type of company:
Listen to the next part of the presentation and complete
the list of features
and components above.
providing office supplies,
2: general public
Use the correct form of verbs in the list to describe the functions
stationery and art materials
of the different components. Listen to the present:
operating across Europe. They
Products:
=», stationery
ands
capture + enable + function
plug + provide - shine » store
necessary.
Services: None
take - transmit
Relationship with
The camera == the writing.
customer: #5 scheme
The infrared light == onto the patented Inspiration notebook paper.
sell to high street customers.
Aloyalty card gives
€5 discount
‘on every €30 spent.
3 The Bluetooth™ antenna == the writing
in real time
to the user's smartphone if connected
Work in groups of three to analyse three more companies in the same way. Share your information
ifthe Den da not connected, tus
the waiting data in the flash memory.
with your partners
5 The microphone == the pen
a dictation device.
your
6 The battery == six hours of continuous use and only == one hour to charge.
Partner A: Look here. Partner B: Look at File 2 on page 198. Partner C: Look at File 9 on page 202.
7 The USB cable = into the socket at the end of the pen.
Inspiration
Inspiration manufacture a range of high-quality writing materials and leather-bound notebooks
based on traditional designs with an emphasis on environmentally-friendly materials
Match the German words with the correct English words.
unbekat
Nörtern umgehen, S.
production. Their products are sold in stationery stores, large bookstores and through their online
günstig, billig
a batterylife
store. They also supply materials to large corporate companies with customers’ own branding
2 teuer
b capacity
on their writing tools and paper products.
3 vielseitig
¢ cheap
oo MURS REA EEE
think about the message behind certain
4 Preis-Leistungs-Verhältnis
d expensive
words. Describing something as cheap
5 zuverlässig
e performance
Analyse a company you know from one of the categories below using the headings in exercise 4A.
é Peat
could be understood
as poor quality. It is.
better, therefore, to use alternatives such as
+ anelectric/hybrid
car manufacturer
anonline retailer/marketplace
7 Leistung
g valueformoney
| inexpensive
or excellent value for money.
a food delivery service
asoftware company
8 Akkulaufzeit
h_ versatile
Jr oe TE Ho %&-

--- Seite 53 ---
Products and services
Look at the table showing Inspiration’s smartpen and two of its competitors’ products. Some of the
sentences about the products are wrong. Correct the
wrong sentences.
ut the pr
wrong.
Corr
rong
You use a SWOT analysis to evaluate
the new product and its market.
The Pensive is cheaper than the E-Scribe, but more expensive than the Inspired.
2 The E-Scribe takes longer to charge than the Inspired.
3 The Inspired is as versatile as the Pensive.
# ASWOT analysis (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats) is a framework for
4 The Inspired is more reliable than the Pensive.
identifying and analysing the internal and external factors that can have an impact on the success
5 The Pensive has the lowest memory capacity but the longest battery life.
or failure of a new project, product or business plan.
6 The E-Scribe has better reliability than the Inspired.
ae SERIE
Before you start, match the German words below with the correct English terms.
charge/continuous
use inhours)
(% successful capture)
Hlektroschrott
Risiken
a ale
© ‘weaknesses
Inspired | €200
+ Textcapture
2 Forschung und
6 Ruf
b supply chain
f e-waste
+ Bluetooth™
Entwicklung
7 Schwächen
opportunities
g. threats
+ Audio recording
3 Chancen
8 Stärken
d_ research and
h reputation
EScribe | €175 | + Textcapture
4 Lieferkette
9 schätzen
development
strengths
+ Bluetooth™
Pensive | €195
+ Textcapture
Work
in groups
of three. Read your File and share your information with your partners. Decide
+ Bluetooth™
together where the points belong. Copy the table and complete the SWOT analysis.
+ Audio recording
Partner A: Look here. Partner B: Look at File
4 on page 200. Partner
C: Look at File 10 on page 202.
Strengths (internal to company)
Opportunities (external to company)
During the second part of the product presentation, Patricia Murphy describes how the Inspired pen works
with Silverlining’s cloud service.
Complete the short notes with verbs in the correct passive form.
Partner A
capture - create - make - store - synchronize
Inspiration has a solid customer base and a good reputation for high-quality products
transmit + upload
other electronic hardware manufacturers have similar products on the market
our customers may not like the fact that our smartpen could add to electronic waste
First, the writing and audio data is captured
(lithium battery)
by the Inspired smartpen.
developments in tablets and smartphones could make our product obsolete
Then, this information == via Bluetooth™ to
high research and development costs
the user's smartphone.
‘Add one or two of your own ideas.
3 The captured data is processed by the smart:
phone app and audio and image files
(ETO
4 After that, the files m= to the Silverlining server,
and the handwriting is converted into a text file.
Your company is thinking of buying a smartpen system such as the Inspired product for its employees.
5 NEE, the text leis sent hack
to the users
Your boss would like to hear people’s opinions about it
smartphone while a copy = in the cloud
database
Write
a comment making a recommendation in favour
against
‘SKILLS CHECKLIST.
6 Finally, any future changes that ss to the user's
purchasing
the Inspired smartpen system for your company.
Use the
Writing
a comment
Inspiration notebook w= between the smart:
notes below and add any other points you can think of.
© Havel stated my own
phone and the Silverlining server.
Pros:
Cons:
opinion?
improves efficiency
» expensive
© Have | checked
A colleague
is interested in finding out more about the processes involved in the manufacture
ubetulwway
of saving iiformmation’
«date security &brWagy
a product
or the delivery of a service at
a company that you know. Write
a short email explaining
+ makes a good impression
nore e-waste
Penne,
the steps. Use the underlined words in exercise 7A and the passive form where needed.
per-free office
+ yet another thing to charge

--- Seite 54 ---
Products and services
Das Abonnement-Preismodell ist ein boomendes und erfolgreiches Geschäft, das sich besonders
Softwareentwickler eignet. Dennoch gibt es einige Risiken zu beachten. Wie kann ein Unternehmen den
Übergang von einem All-In-One-Produkt-Modell zu einem Abo-Modell bewältigen?
Einige Unternehmen konzentrieren sich zu stark auf die Gewinnung neuer Kunden. Aber was diese
Unternehmen zu ihrem Nachteil vergessen, ist ihr bestehender Kundenstamm. Betrachten wir den
Kunden, der im Oktober in ein neues Softwaresystem investiert und im Dezember eine Marketing-E-Mail
erhält, in der steht, dass seine „neue“ Software im nächsten Jahr nicht mehr unterstützt wird und er
You are getting some work experience at Schmidt & Grüntuch Steuersoftware
GmbH. The company publishes CD-ROMs with computer software for tax accountants
and private
consumers, but now they are considering changing to a subscription pricing business model
sich für ein neues Abo-Preismodell anmelden muss. Dieser Kunde ist wahrscheinlich bald ein Ex-Kunde.
filo
‘Scenario support, S. 188
Also ist der Verlust
treuer Kunden ein Risiko, das Unternehmen unbedingt vermeiden müssen.
Das sogenannte Fischmodell zeigt die kurzfristigen Auswirkungen der Geschaftsmodellumstellung
auf die Kosten und Erträge eines Unternehmens. So können die Umsätze während der Umstellung bei
iden
Kosten
stark
sinken.
Haren
Sie sich den Podcast
an und machen Sie sich auf Deutsch Notizen zu den folgenden Punkten, damit
SERIE SIR ONE
fristig zeigt sich jedoch ein besseres Bild:
Sie später Ihre Chefin über die Inhalte
des Podcasts informieren können.
Rezept
vordem
Ihre Vorgesetzte hat Sie gebeten, sich einen englischen Podcast zum Thema anzuhören.
Das Fischmodell
höhere Gewinnedurch schnelleres Um-
Übergang
Auswirkungen derinvesitionen | VDeTBanE
Wie hoch war der Preis von Acrombie PDF vor der Änderung?
satzwachstum und niedrigere Kosten.
in neue Fälgkeiten
Wie hoch ist die Abonnementgebiihr pro Monat bzw. Jahr?
Um die negativen Auswirkungen
imeatz-
3 Welche Vorteile brachte laut Acrombie diese Änderung den Kunden?
(3 Punkte)
des Übergangs abzuschwächen, ist es
Einnahme
4 Was waren die ersten Reaktionen von Acrombies Kunden? (2 Punkte)
wichtig, dass möglichst viele Kunden
5 Welche Auswirkungen auf den Umsatz von Acrombie gab es zwischen 2012 und 2018?
den Wechsel schnell durchführen. Der
6 Welche Risiken bestehen im Bereich Produktentwicklung?
Übergang muss im Voraus signalisiert
7 Welche Chancen der Kundenbindung bietet das neue System?
werden und sollte für die Kunden öko-
nomisch sinnvoll sein. Stammkunden
Übergangszeit
sollten attraktive Preise für die neuen
Source: Technology. en Paybook 2016 (TS
Scenario support, 5.188
‚Abonnements angeboten werden.
Ein englischsprachiger Projektleiter bei Schmidt & Grüntuch benötigt Ihre Hilfe, um den
folgenden Artikel auf einer deutschen Firmenwebsite zu verstehen.
Hi there,
Can you help me understand this text about German software subscription pricing?
Is there a risk we could lose customers and how can we avoid this?
2 What about the costs of the change for our company - how will it affect our costs
Marketingmaßnahmen und Werbung müssen die Vorteile des Abos hervorheben, d.h. ginstigere Beträge,
regelmäßige Software-Updates, transparente Abrechnung und die Freiheit, Abonnements ohne Kündi-
gungsfrist zu beenden.
Auf Unternehmensseite bedeutet das für die Softwareentwicklung regelmäßige, kleinere Updates, was
zur Folge hat, dass auch nicht mehr viele Überstunden zu einem bestimmten Starttermin anfallen. Dies
kann zu einer Verringerung des Gehalts der Mitarbeiter führen, die bislang Überstundenzahlungen erhiel
ten, und dadurch Unzufriedenheit auslösen. Daher ist es sehr wichtig, den Mitarbeiterinnen und Mitarbei-
tern die Vorteile des Umstiegs auf ein abobasiertes Modell aufzuzeigen, d.h. familienfreundlichere Arbeits
zeiten und weniger Stress. Wenn nötig, sollten die Arbeitgeber bereit sein, ein höheres Grundgehalt anzubie-
ten. Gleichzeitig muss das Unternehmen mit Kundinnen und Kunden sowie Lieferanten klar kommunizieren
Iron
HES AG MEE IC
CUNO
und gemeinsam mit ihnen Zahlungs- und Finanzierungsbedingungen so anpassen, dass der Übergang
3. Big changes are always difficult - how could the change affect our employees and
stem eel eerie cant
how can we make it easier?
+ What docs the article say about suppliers and customers during the changeover?
Thanks in advance for your help!
Ein Artikel schildert
die Versäumnisse eines bekannten Unternehmens bei der Marktanpassung.
Lesen Sie den Text auf Seite 74 und beantworten die folgenden Fragen Ihrer Vorgesetzten auf Deutsch.
Welche Fehler hat das Unternehmen bei der Umstellung gemacht?
Welche negative Konsequenzen hatten diese Fehler?
Welche Probleme hatte das Unternehmen mit seinen Mitarbeitern?
‘Was ist im Jahr 2013 passiert und warum?
Lesen Sie den Text und beantworten Sie die Fragen des Projektleiters auf Englisch.
Mediat
spre

--- Seite 55 ---
Products and services
a failure to adapt led to the death of a giant
You are doing an internship with Messaging Ltd, the advertising agency that is responsible for the
marketing mix
for the Inspired smartpen.
In 2007, one Finnish company enjoyed a 49.4%
share of the mobile phone market. Yet in 2013,
that same company’s market share had shrunk
to just 3% and the company’s failing phone
manufacturing business was bought by a top PC
software company. Where did it all go wrong
for the mobile phone giant Nokia?
One of the biggest factors in the failure was the
company’s strategy. The brand was famous for its
devices, and while smaller and smaller mobiles
were trendy in the 1990s and the built-in game
‘Snake’ was popular worldwide,
this was the pre-
smartphone era. When the simple rectangular
iPhone was launched in 2007, phones became
‘smart. Mobile apps were born. These new
devices all looked similar - customers weren't
buying a device now, but the services and
platforms that could synchronize and organize
their new online, digital lives. The Finnish
company, however, kept its focus on devices
and hardware. They failed to develop a software
ecosystem, their own products had different
operating systems, 57 different systems by 2009.
This meant their products took longer to develop
and make. Once loyal customers stopped waiting
and moved to other smartphone brands.
Another major reason was a leadership failure.
In an attempt to become more flexible and
responsive to the shorter and shorter product
life cycles in mobile technology, the company
decided to restructure its workforce. Product
development teams that had worked quite
independently in the past were now expected to
work as one. A lack of communication between
the company’s senior bosses and its workers
meant these changes came as a shock. Creative
teams were broken up, experienced workers
became angry and left the company, while those
who stayed became demotivated. This robbed
the giant of its greatest assets - its brains and
creative spark.
The giant struggled on. Its brand became un-
fashionable and its market share grew smaller
and smaller. Profits turned to huge losses and
tens of thousands of workers lost their jobs.
‘The giant was now an old and weak shadow of
itself. In 2013, the Finnish brand disappeared asa
maker
of mobile phones,
never to appear again
Until 2016 that is, when an ex-director of the
company bought the rights to its name and
classic designs and re-entered the smartphone
market. At the time of writing, it had built up a
1% share of the world market.
(au words)
Some of your colleagues
You and your colleagues are visiting the office of the smartpen manufacturer Inspiration. Pierre DuBois,
Head of Product Development, explains the ‘waterfall’ approach to project management.
answer
their questions.
Pierre DuBois shows you the Gantt chart which the Product Development Department uses. Listen to
Warum wird der Ansatz als , Wasserfallmodell” bezeichnet?
Warum wird die Methode in der Produktion verwendet?
Handelt es sich hierbei um einen neuen, modernen Ansatz?
Was sind die Vorteile des Modells?
Welche Nachteile erwähnt Pierre DuBois?
idn’t understand everything Pierre said. isten and write short notes to
his talk again and label the names of the stages with the letters in the chart below.
construction
& assembly
analysis & planning
design
testing
& evaluation
fie)
Ihre Vorgesetzte bittet
Sie um Ihre
‘Meinung
zur Preismodell-Anderung des
Unternehmens. Sie haben sich dazu bereits
ein paar Gedanken gemacht.
market launch
Die Steuervorschriften ändern sich jedes Jahr.
Software muss aktualisiert werden.
Mitarbeiter
Gantt chart
Schreiben Sie ein Memo an Ihre Vorgesetzte,
— keine Bonuszahlungen mehr (Okt-Dez)
in dem Sie Ihre Meinung über die Änderung
= keine unangenchmen Arbeitszeiten mehr (Okt-Dez)
des Geschäftsmodells von Schmidt & Grüntuch
Kundenstamm — älter, konservativ
aktueller Preis zu teuer
Insolvenzrisiko
Ihre Meinung.
stabileres Einkommen
J- GF T BB BO A.

--- Seite 56 ---
Products and services
After visiting Inspiration,
you and your colleagues are now on a tour of Silverlining, the IT company
responsible for the inspired smartpen’s mobile app and cloud synchronization system. As a software
developer, Silverlining use a project management approach known as ‘agile’.
Match the headings to the columns on the whiteboard at Silverlining.
Backlog - In Progress - Signed off - Testing - User stories
AGILE
METHODOLOGY
Inspired smartpen - Sprint weeks 8-9
Asa Speaker
The email app — | want the
I wANT
The power
of Arabic,
doesn’t open
pento
THE PENTO
light doesn't
Iwant the
when tap the
 synchronize
RECOGNISE
link when tt is
Smartpen to
email icon in
appointments
SHORT
Synchronizing
be able to
the notebook
Iwrite in the
‘ABBREVIATIONS
recognize my
Inspired smart
LIKE FY
writing
calendar
AND NB.
Look at the sentences
below. Then listen to the guide
and decide if they are true or false.
Iwant the
when | dran @
I want the pen
I want the
pen to turn
na circle) im my
Tosynchronize
audio files in
With an agile approach, the workers are grouped in teams according to their job,
itself off if
Inspired smart
every few
mp3 and wav
2 The staff at Inspiration have to write notes on Post-Its about the functions they want
I don't use it
Calendar, | want
minutes as
formats
the finished app to have.
10 minutes
bested to know
m writing
3 These notes become the master plan and cannot be changed during development.
I don't lose
4 The teams at Silverlining work in very short stages.
anything
5 The app can only be launched on the market when every feature has been developed.
6 The staff at Silverlining are very formal with each other.
want to
Inccd a
7. Inthe agile approach, short meetings every day help to keep everybody informed about
be able to
spellcheck
the progress of the project.
activate the
function in
Pen using
the app.
Correct the false sentences from A.
isin
My spelling is
terrible! ®
Match the words from the guide’s talk with the correct meaning.
backlog
a a function or task software must be able to do in the end product
cross-functional
b alist of tasks that need to be completed
iteration
¢ amethod of continually improving a product/service
4 iterative approach
d_ anew and better version of something
minimum viable product
e a period of time during which work must be completed
‘One of your colleagues
missed the tour of Silverlining. They are interested in the picture of
6 scrum master
f anyone who has an interest in or is part of
a project/process
the agile whiteboard. Write a paragraph explaining how the whiteboard is used to organize
sprint
g ateam of people with different expertise and roles
the work of the project development team. Do not forget to explain the terms used (sprint,
stakeholder
h_ ashort daily project meeting
user story, ete.).
stand-up
the leader of
a team in the agile process
user story
the most basic offering good enough to be launched on the market

--- Seite 57 ---
‘A marketing expert named E. Jerome McCarthy defined the
4 Ps in the 1960s. They have been used and
developed since then as the so-called ‘marketing mix’ in order
to help businesses create new products
or services for their customers.
Read this text about the 4 Ps and decide where sentences A-D should go.
A Itcan also affect how a product is seen by customers because it is an indicator of value.
Businesses should also consider how they plan to develop it after its launch to ensure that
it has along and profitable life.
C However, if one of these goes wrong, a company’s reputation and a product's image can be
destroyed very quickly.
D_Andif customers purchase online, the goods or services still need to be delivered to them
P for product: Product covers everything to do with the creation, development and management of
products or services. It's not only about what to make but when and how to make it and above all what
the unique selling point of the product is.
1 Development of the product's next iteration - or version —
should always be a priority. Furthermore, a product is not just a physical thing It includes intangible
add-ons such as after-sales service, guarantees, installation and maintenance anything that helps to
distinguish the product from the competition and make the customer more likely to buy it.
P for price: Price is not perhaps as simple as it seems. Price doesn't only refer to the production costs
Plus the mark-up a business adds on top to generate a profit. 2 Pricing a product too low could send
a message to customers that it is of low value and cheaply made. On the other hand, pricing the goods
too high - especially if it is a new product or from a new manufacturer - could stop people from buying
it. Pricing strategies include discounts on large orders, lower prices for early adopters of new products
or services, and subscription pricing models, which are becoming increasingly common. It is critical
that the pricing strategy is right for the product's target market.
P for place: Place means simply where your target customers can find the product - whether in a
physical bricks-and-mortar store or online. The product must be positioned and distributed in places
where its target market can buy it. 3 Logistics, distribution channels and the retailers involved in
getting the product to the right place at the right time for the end consumer are all key components
of place. Recent developments in this area include so-called ‘pop-up’ stores which appear in empty
retail spaces or at special events and disappear after a short period.
P for promotion: Promotion is about advertising and communication and often involves publicity and
high-profile activities which can successfully persuade customers to hand over their money. 4 Ofthe
four Ps, promotion has been most affected by the internet, in particular by social media. Search Engine
Optimization (SEO) - getting your product and brand to the top of the results page in an internet
search —is an absolute must these days. The rise of social media influencers and the fact that traditional
word-of-mouth advertising can now be read online by millions of internet users mean that social
media needs wise and constant analysis, planning and management.
(415 words)
Now listen and check your answers.
Products and services
Find the English words in the text for these German expressions. They are in the correct order.
Alleinstellungsmerkmal
5 Rabatte
7 konventionelle
2 Garantien
6 Früh-Anwender/in
Ladengeschäft
3 Wartung
(von technischen
8 Vertriebskanäle
4 Preisaufschlag
Neuerungen)
9 Mundpropaganda
Messaging Ltd had a brainstorming session to come up with ideas for a marketing mix for the Inspired
smartpen. The target market is college and university students.
First, look at the pictures of some traditional and some modern things from the 4 Ps marketing mix.
Match a traditional item with its more modern equivalent. Then say which of the 4 Ps- product, price,
place, promotion - each pair belongs to.
SALE!
OFF.
MARKETING MIX
Now copy the diagram and put the ideas below into the
correct category.
2-year warranty » 20% student discount + free delivery
discounts - distribute
flyers at colleges - pop-up shop
at universities + high-quality aluminium casing + free
Inspiration notebook
with every smartpen - hire young
adult social media influencers + yearly subscription
product demonstrations at colleges by young people
search engine paid-for keywords + service hotline
offer the product to stationery stores near colleges
set up social media account/page + special student
models
with a range of colours
Using the 4 Ps approach, work in groups to design a rough outline showing how Inspiration could
market their smart writing set to young people such as college and university students.

--- Seite 58 ---
Promotion is an important part of the marketing mix. As part of their promotional strategy
for the Inspired
smartpen, Melanie Draper, the Account Manager at Messaging Ltd, has asked you to help design a video
advertisement.
Before working on ideas for the advert, listen to what she tells you about a concept called AIDA.
Now use the words below to complete the gaps in Melanie's talk. There are more words than you need.
bring convey + create + drawback « effective + grab - interest + satisfy + selling + stand
The letters A-I-D-A ws for Attention, Interest, Desire and Action.
These four factors are critical in the design of an == advertisement.
An advert must == the attention of our potential customers quickly.
You then have to arouse their
What is [the product's] unique == point?
An effective advertisement should ws the desire in the customer for our product.
Our advert should ss the message -"you’re attractive and successful’
On Melanie's desk there are four pictures from a storyboard. The four scenes are an idea for a TV and
internet video advertisement
for the Inspired smartpen.
Match the scenes with the sequence below.
Opening scene (attention)
Second scene (interest)
Third scene (desire).
Closing scene (action):
Scene: A
Scene: B
‘Melanie wants more ideas for advertisements for the Inspired smartpen. Work in small groups and
use the AIDA concept to create a storyboard of four scenes for a video advert. Then present your
storyboard to the class.
a TM Bok,
Products and services
Melanie has an idea for a poster advertisement,
and she would like to know what you think.
Look at the photo of her idea.
Analyse and evaluate how her idea meets
or does not meet the AIDA concept.
2 Whois the target market for Melanie's
advertisement? Give reasons.
3 How effective do you think the advert
would be?
Melanie asks your colleague
to write an enquiry to a
packaging manufacturer in the UK because she wants
to present some prototypes of the Inspired smartpen
box designs. Your colleague needs your help with
some phrases.
Complete
the text
phrases.
the following words
attached - delivery and payment - favourable
quotation - leading - look forward - prestigious
production run - satisfied « Sir or Madam
sourced specifications - sustainable
Dear Damen und Herren*
We note from your company's website that you provide high quality packaging using nachhaltige? materials to
the retail sector. We are most interested in developing new high-quality presentation packaging for one
of our
client's latest retail products.
We are a führende3 marketing firm and we are currently working together
with a renommiertem# manufacturer
of high-quality writing materials based on modern interpretations of traditional designs. Until now they have
bezogen' their packaging needs from a Polish supplier, but in order to meet higher sustainability and environ:
mentally friendly standards
they are looking
for a new supplier.
We would need a limited Serienproduktion$ of approximately twenty based on four different designs. When our
client is zufrieden?
with the final design, the chosen supplier could expect
an annual order of between forty to
fifty thousand units.
Ihave angehängt® a PDF containing the Vorgaben® of the prototype designs.
Please send us
a günstiges Angebot for the initial limited order and the subsequent full production run,
including details of Lieferung und Zahlung".
We freuen uns® to hearing from you soon.
Yours faithfully

--- Seite 59 ---
2 fie
You are getting some work experience in the Marketing Department of a large
German supermarket chain. The company is interested in finding ways to reduce the amount of
plastic packaging that is used in their supermarkets.
Scenario support, 5.189
Ihre Abteilungsleiterin bittet Sie, Recherchen über den verpackungsfreien Einzelhandel
anzustellen. Sie finden einen Podcast
zu diesem Thema.
Hören Sie zu und machen Sie sich auf Deutsch Notizen zu den folgenden Fragen.
Rezept
Wie viel Prozent der Lebensmittel und Getränke sind in Kunststoff verpackt?
2 Wie viele recycelbare und biologisch abbaubare Verpackungen verwendet Morrisseys in seinen
Eigenmarkenprodukten?
3 Was ist das „SFSC“-Konzept und wie trägt es dazu bei, die Verpackung zu reduzieren?
4 Wie geht Morrisseys mit der Verpackung von Fleisch und Fisch um?
5 Wie hat sich das neue Verpackungskonzept auf Kosten und Image von Morrisseys ausgewirkt?
Scenario support, 5.189
Ein englischsprachiger Kollege ist der Ansicht, dass der Trend, auf Kunststoff komplett zu
verzichten, zu extrem sei. Sie möchten mehr zum Thema herausfinden, um mit ihm besser darüber
diskutieren zu können. Sie finden einen interessanten Text in Internet.
Fassen Sie die wichtigsten Aspekte des Textes unter den folgenden Überschriften auf Englisch zusammen:
- The environmental impact of glass bottles
+ The benefits of plastic packaging in avoiding food wastage
+ The factors that contribute to the environmental footprint of packaging materials
Heutzutage gilt als unumstritten, dass Kunststoffverpackungen belastend für die Umwelt sind —
besonders, wenn es sich um Einwegverpackungen handelt und noch mehr, wenn sie lange Trans-
portwege hinter sich haben. Aus diesem Grund verfolgen viele Einzelhändler und Supermärkte seit
einiger Zeit eine Null-Verpackungspolitik. Einige Kunststoffproduzenten behaupten jedoch, dass dies
hauptsächlich auf den aktuellen „Greenwashing”-Trend zurückzuführen sei - d.h. umweltfreundlich
zu erscheinen, ohne es wirklich zu sein. Der Interessenverband American Plastics Federation geht
sogar so weit zu behaupten, dass eine vollständige Abkehr von Kunststoffverpackungen viel umwelt-
schädlicher sei.
Der Verband zeigt am Beispiel von Flaschen, dass Gasflaschen in der Herstellung zwar günstiger als
Kunststoffflaschen,
jedoch zehnmal so schwer sind. Das höhere Gewicht hat zur Folge, dass für den
Transport von Glasflaschen vierzig Prozent mehr Energie benötigt wird, während des Transports mehr
Kohlendioxid entsteht und die Transportkosten fünfmal höher als bei Kunststoffflaschen sind. So
seien dem Verband zufolge beim Gebrauch von Glasflaschen die Auswirkungen auf die Umwelt viel
drastischer.
TeEo%
Products and services
Als weiteres Beispiel führt die American Plastics Federation Lebensmittelabfälle an. Gurken ohne Ver
packung halten sich bei Aufbewahrung außerhalb eines Kühlschranks zwei Tage, bei Lagerung im
Kühlschrank neun Tage. Mit Kunststoffverpackungen können Gurken im Kühlschrank bis zu fünfzehn
Tage frisch bleiben. Bei Fleisch seien die Vorteile von Kunststoffverpackungen noch deutlicher, heißt
es.In versiegelten Kunststoffschalen kann Fleisch zwischen drei und sieben Tage lang frisch bleiben, bei
Verwendung von Kunststoff-Vakuumverpackungen sogar bis zu 45 Tage lang. Bessere Kunststoff-Schutz-
Verpackungen können so den Abfall von unverkauften oder beschädigten Lebensmitteln reduzieren,
bei Fleisch seien dies vierzig Prozent.
Dies zeigt, dass Verpackungen aus anderen Materialien nicht zwangsläufig eine bessere Ökobilanz
als Kunststoffverpackungen haben. Wichtig sind Faktoren wie Aufwand bei der Herstellung des
Materials, Transportweg und Entsorgung bzw. Häufigkeit der Wiederverwendungen. Denn um zu
beurteilen, wie umweltfreundlich eine Verpackung wirklich ist, muss immer ihr gesamter Lebensweg
betrachtet werden.
(295 Wörter)
Scenario support, 5.189
Ihre Abteilungsleiterin möchte bei der nächsten Abteilungssitzung über dieses Thema referieren.
Sie bittet Sie, folgenden Text auszuwerten.
Lesen Sie den Artikel und beantworten Sie ihre Fragen stichwortartig auf Deutsch.
»Rezeption:L
tehen
Bitte lesen Sie diesen Artikel über den verpackungsfreien Lebensmitteleinzeihandel und
nennen Sie mir Stichpunkte zu folgenden Themen
Reduzierung von Verpackungsabfällen im Lebensmittelhandel
Reduzierung von Verpackung im Supermarkt
Risiko von Lebenswittelverschwendung Im verpackungsfreien Einzelhandel
Wie könnten wir die Kunden ermutigen, sich für eine reduzierte Verpackung zu entscheiden?
Wie würden wir unser Obst und Gemiise kennzeichnen, wenn sie nicht verpackt sind?
PROMOTING ALTERNATIVES — PACKAGE-FREE RETAIL
Increasing numbers of retailers across Europe
are renouncing single-use plastic packaging
selling more of their products loose or with
refillable containers. Efforts to reduce waste and
single-use plastic packaging can be seen in
different aspects of food retail
Distribution: a French retailer introduced 18
million reusable packing crates for fruit and
vegetables. Reverse logistics on these crates is
supported by electronic chips, which allow
retailers to track their crates and produce
throughout the distribution chain. Cases are
rented rather than owned by the retailer, saving
150 tonnes of waste annually and reducing
emissions by 30% compared to previous
distribution methods.
Inside the store: more retailers are selling
goods loose or with minimal packaging. A key
challenge is to eliminate single-use plastic
bags, plastic straws and single-use coffee cups
among independent retailers.

--- Seite 60 ---
Zero waste retail: a number of innovative retailers
_retailers offer customers reusable containers with
have based their business model on renouncing —_ refundable deposits or offer small discounts to
both food and packaging waste, by encouraging
customers who bring their own containers.
the use of
reusable
pack
Laser-labelling: Some large retail chains have
With their strong focus on sustainability, these
expanded laser labelling to fruit and vegetables
retailers often source regional and organic produce, _ meaning consumer information is printed directly
supporting short food supply chains (SFSCs) and _ onto the produce and no extra paper stickers are
further lowering the risk of food wastage.Some
necessary.
(236 words)
Die Supermarktkette erhält eine E-Mail als Antwort auf ihre Anfrage zu Lebensmittelspendern.
Lesen Sie die E-Mail und beantworten Sie die Fragen Ihrer Abteilungslei
Einige Kunststoffe reagieren auf UV-Strahlung oder auf in
Lebensmitteln enthaltene Stoffe. Wie sieht es hier damit aus?
2 Können Sie mir sagen, ob der Spender schwer zu montieren ist?
3 Wie leicht oder schwierig ist es für die Kunden, exakt die
gewünschte Menge aus den Spendern zu bekommen?
4 Wann können Sie liefern? Was sind ihre Zahlungsbedingungen?
Dear
Ms Schmidt
Thank you for your enquiry about our Clear and Clean range of food and grain dispensers.
For the retail needs you described in your enquiry, | recommend our 45-litre 5-set product code FD 6012.
The dispensers are made from the highest quality polycarbonate plastic, block ultra-violet light and are resistant
to oils and sugars. They will not discolour or turn yellow. The product components are easy to assemble, have only
five parts and do not require any tools. The dispensers are easy for customers to use and give full control of the
desired quantities. Our bio-safe design mean foodstuffs are protected from human touch.
ur 45-litre 5-set costs €860.00 per unit VAT including
a 5% discount
on orders of 5 or more. Delivery at place
within the EU would cost €480.00 and take 8-10 business days.
A discount of 2% is available
for full payment within ten days
of delivery.
| hope that this answers
all of your questions. if not, please do not hesitate to call me on +44562-255 688.
| attach our current PDF catalogue with prices for your information.
Kind regards
Ihre Abteilungsleiterin bittet Sie, einen Flyer zu entwerfen, der die Kundinnen und Kunden
über die Änderung der Verpackungspolitik des Supermarktes informieren soll
Entwerfen Sie einen Flyer, der die Vorteile der neuen verpackungsfreien Richtlinie beschreibt. Der Flyer
soll auch mögliche Unannehmlichkeiten für die Kunden erwähnen, insgesamt aber gute Gründe für den
Umstieg nennen.
odukt
TeEo%
PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT
Lookat pictures taken from the video you are going to watch. What do you think the video will be about?
_iii :&
El match the pictures from the
leo with the captions below.
Reviews and feedback enable a customer-focused approach
Work quickly on an idea
- do only what's necessary, not more
Traditional product development was time-consuming
Modern goods can be easily updated without changing the tangible product
watch the video. Decide if the following statements are true or false according to the video. Correct the
false statements.
Traditional product development took just as long in the past as it does today.
These days, a version of a product can be brought to market in a very short time.
A minimum viable product is made quickly and cheaply, but only has the basic features.
A sprint is when a team works quickly on an idea and doesn’t do more than is needed.
Iterative design means repeatedly updating a product even after it has been launched.
It is not important to finish a product when using an iterative design approach.
Reviews and feedback help customers to focus on the company's iterative approach.
Noununa
El think about the question at the end of the video:
‘The need for faster development cycles has hit almost all industries, what's it like where you work?"
Write a short paragraph in answer to the question. Use examples from your work experience or from
products that you know and use regularly.

--- Seite 61 ---
3 FURTHER FOCUS
Read the following text and answer the questions in German.
>> Rez
Welche zwei Dinge ermöglichen es den Unternehmen, immer mehr Daten über das Kunden-
verhalten zu sammeln?
2 Warum stimmen McDonald zufolge viele Verbraucher Vereinbarungen zu, die den Unternehmen
das Datensammeln ermöglichen?
3 Welche Anhaltspunkte liefert McDonald dafür, dass die Verbraucher immer weniger Auswahl
auf dem Markt haben?
4 Was rät McDonald den Verbrauchern?
Are we heading for a future of less freedom and less choice?
Juliana McDonald is the author
of a new book called “The Surveillance Market’ and her main argument isthat
the ultimate aim of modern capitalism is not to automate production, but to automate ...us, the customers.
McDonald believes that from the beginning of the new millennium, the technology giants of Silicon
Valley have been perfecting ways of gathering information and learning about customer behaviour.
All of this information, she says, is now being used to develop ‘prediction products’ — these ‘products
can anticipate
what you~ the customer
- will do now, soon and in the future.
The rise of smart products - home speakers, video camera doorbells, wearables including even smart
clothes ~ has enabled companies to gather ever more information on what we do and where and when
we do it. The trend towards everything-as-a-service is also giving companies detailed information about
how we use the services we pay for. While some of this information is used to improve and develop these
services, there is
a lot more behavioural data that companies
are gathering about us that is not directly
related to the services we pay for. McDonald says that this process has turned people's lives and experience
into human ‘raw materials’ that companies trade in.
But don't
we consumers know
this already? No, she says. People are signing
away their rights when they
click ‘Accept’ to user agreements that they never fully read because they are too long and written in legal
language. Is there a reason
to fear these developments? McDonald says that we should. While consumer
society should normally consist of a free market with freedom of choice for the consumer, McDonald
believes our freedom of choice is being destroyed. She gives the example of online news apps. Knowing
what users read in real time, news apps provide
a ‘Most read’ summary of news stories and then readers
start getting their news straight from that section, rather than choosing freely what to read.
The same process is happening elsewhere. In 2019, one internet search engine had eighty-eight per cent
of the search market, one online marketplace had fifty per cent of the US e-commerce market, one social
media company controlled two-thirds of its market while two mobile phone manufacturers had half the
market between them. According to McDonald,
this all points to a decrease in choice for the consumer
driven by firms knowing much more about
What can we do about it? McDonald says that we are in the middle of a revolution and, being in the middle,
we cannot clearly see how
it will end. But we must wake up to this consumer culture of surveillance,
people and their governments
must protect personal data before we are in a future where companies
know’ what we want before we want it and where consumers and society become less free as a result
Let us know what you think by leaving your comments below.
(492 words)
“Smart devices - blessing or curse?’ Write a comment on this question.
FOCUS ON WORDS
Advertising
advertising agency
brand
to bring sth onto the market
to inform sb of sth
to persuade sb
Unique Selling Proposition (USP)
word-of-mouth advertising
Custom
elationships
bricks-and-mortar store
dient
consumer
customer behaviour
to customize sth
data security
guarantee
loyalty
relationship
reputation
to satisfy sb/sth
to sign up for sth
subscription
to tailor sth to/for sb
Project management
approach
evaluation
failure
leadership
maintenance
progress
Features of products and services
benefit
effective
toenable sth
manufacturer
market share
performance
to provide sth
to purchase
quotation
reliable
requirement
retailer
tangible
value for money
Werbeagentur
Marke
etw auf den Markt bringen
jdm etw mitteilen
‚jdn überzeugen, jdn überreden
Alleinstellungsmerkmal
‘Mundpropaganda
(konventionelles) Ladengeschäft
Kunde/Kundin
Verbraucher/in, Konsument/in
Kundenverhalten
etw individuell anpassen
Datensicherheit, Datenschutz
Garantie
Treue
Beziehung
Jdn/etw zufriedenstellen
sich zu etw anmelden
‚Abonnement
etw aufjdn zuschneiden
Herangehensweise, Methode
‚Auswertung, Beurteilung
Misserfolg, Versagen
Führung, Leitung
Wartung, Instandhaltung
Fortschritt, Entwicklung, Fortgang
Vorteil, Nutzen
effektiv, leistungsstark
etw ermöglichen
Hersteller/in
Marktanteil
Leistung
etw anbieten, etw zur Verfügung
stellen
kaufen
Angebot
zuverlässig
Anforderung, Bedingung
Einzelhändler/in
materiell, greifbar, konkret
Preis-Leistungs-Verhaltnis
ad agency
name-brand product Markenprodukt
on the market auf dem Markt
a piece of information (! NOT: informations)
‘ADJ persuasive
= Unique Selling Point; the USP for/of a product
by word of mouth durch Mundpropaganda
N brick Ziegel N mortar Mörtel
dient base Kundenstamm
consumerism Konsumdenken, -verhalten
to attract customers Kunden gewinnen
N customization
personal data; data privacy
vgl. warranty Garantie, Gewährleistung
loyalty card; brand loyalty
toestablish a relationship eine Beziehung aufbauen.
to have a reputation for sth für etw bekannt sein
V to satisfy sb’s needs AD) satisfied
to become a member Mitglied werden
Vto subscribe
N tailor Schneider/in
Vto approach sth etw angehen
Vito evaluate sb/sth
V to fail, to go wrong schiefgehen
to lead a team
maintenance work Wartungsarbeiten
in progress in Bearbeitung
Vto benefit from sth
Neffectivity
to be able
to do sth zu etw fähig sein
N manufacturing
V to manufacture
Vto gain a market share einen Marktanteil erzielen
!vgl. performance = Aufführung
service provider Dienstleister
N purchase; to make a purchase
vgl. quotation = Zitat
to rely on sb/sth sich aufjdn/etw verlassen
retail Einzelhandel
<> intangible
AD) good value preiswert

--- Seite 62 ---
BUSINESS .
Before you start learning
about commercial correspondence in English,
you find a self-help course with
a podcast
on the internet.
Listen to the podcast and label stages 1-5 and points 6-8 of the diagram.
People communicate in many different ways both at work and in their free time.
puver=-p'ecl'-y:seuce
SELLER
—> mm? —> BUYER
seller
may also send
BUYER
—> ==? —> SELLER
buyer agrees
to accept
BUYER
—> mn —> SELLER
PER = c.
Match the typical phrases and expressions (a-j) with the five stages in the diagram. There are two
phrases for each stage.
a Many thanks for the above-mentioned
order.
b Many thanks for your enquiry.
Many thanks for your offer dated 10 July 20.
Our invoice for the goods ordered is enclosed.
e Our terms of payment are cash with order.
Please let us have your latest catalogue.
g Please send us your acknowledgement in the near future.
h_ Please transfer €1,000.00 to our account no. within ... working days.
Thank you for placing your order with our company.
You have been recommended to us by
Look at the photos (1-6) above and use the words in the list to label them. Add to the list any other
popular means of communication that you use or have heard of.
You are now given some phrases and sentences taken from an email but in the wrong order.
First decide which stage (1-5) in the diagram they are from, then put them in the correct order.
email - handwritten letter - handwritten
note - instant messaging service - landline - mobile phone
a ...and we enclose our current catalogue and price list for your information.
Which means of communication do you use most or least? Discuss your preferences with a partner
and make a list of the pros and cons of the one you like/dislike the most.
PuancuaceHete |
© As regards the goods requested,
b ... we will be pleased to supply you with 50 e-bikes at €350.00 each.
add multiple recipients
post in an envelope with
a stamp | take time to write
dictate a message
record/send a message
use on a mobile phone network /
BjDeinerywlllbe mace width 30 day:
get instant feedback
remember telephonenumbers | where there is no internet
(not) be hacked
see the recipient's status
use text recognition
OLE EW Ea SCT
be hardtochange/correct | send photos and videos
use the autocorrect function /
include large attachments | take days to arrive (snail mail) | spell checker
Co m 7G ENTE SEIS
A OE Al Gs
peas
be (in)secure
g Our terms of payment are CWO.
Which means of written communication are used in business correspondence? List the advantages
of each means.
h We look forward to receiving
your order.

--- Seite 63 ---
Bayrische Straße 400.
44339 Dortmund + Germany
Tel. +49 231 809871
Fax +49 231 809872
Email: info@bpg-trading ger
www.bpg-trading.ger
3 24 March
4 CONFIDENTIAL
5 McPakit Ltd
350 Portobello Road
EDINBURGH
EHi5 1AN
VEREINIGTES KÖNIGREICH
6 Attn. Ms McDermott, Marketing Department
7 Dear Ms McDermott
8 How to change
your PIN
9 Please follow the instructions in the enclosed document to change your account details.
A copy of our General Terms and Conditions is enclosed for your information.
Should you have any queries, please do not hesitate to contact us on our free hotline:
Letterhead
10 Yours sincerely
BPG Trading GmbH
2 Reference initials
3 Date
4 Special marking
5 Inside address
11 T Lorenz
6 Attention line
7 Salutation
8 Subject line
Tina Lorenz (Mrs)
Body of the letter
Sales Department
10 Complimentary close
11 Signature
12 Enclosure (Enc), Enclosures (Encs)
12 Encs
Leave
a free line for each dot (:)
TeEo%
Commercial correspondence
Business letter layout
‘About 360 million people speak English as their first language and many more use it for business,
so there is no standard layout for business letters. A typical layout used in Europe and elsewhere is
shown opposite
1 Letterhead
The letterhead should include
the sender's name, postal address including the country, telephone
fax numbers, email address and website address. It often also has the company's logo.
Reference
Tina Lorenz (TL) signed the letter and someone
whose initials are
BK (e.g. Bernd Knopf) typed it. Some
companies have different reference systems (e.g. Ref. 1/L 21.4000)
Date
An all-figure date can be misunderstood. in American English 08/09/22 (or 08-09-22) means August 09,
2022 but in British English it means
08 September 2022. For this reason,
the month should always be
written out and the year should be a four-figure number. The usual order
in which a date is written in
business letters and forms is day
(in figures)
- month (as a word)
- year (in figures).
4 Special marking
These include URGENT
/ PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL / PERSONAL
/ AIR MAIL / REGISTERED,
RECORDED DELIVERY. The special marking can be seen over the inside address (see below) in
a window envelope.
CONFIDENTIAL
McPakit Ltd
350 Portobello Road
EDINBURGH
EHISTAN
VEREINIGTES KÖNIGREICH
Attn. Ms McDermott, Marketing Department
window envelope
Inside address
This is the recipient's address. Always include the country if sending a letter abroad (in German if
the letter is being sent from Germany, e.g. IRLAND) because
the same city names can be found in
different countries. When writing to a UK address write the town or city in capital letters and the
postcode on a separate line under it.
6 Attention (Attn.)
The attention
line is under the inside address and close enough to it to be seen in a window envelope
(see above). if there is an attention line, the letter may be opened by the company's post department
and given to the person named. However, if the inside address starts with someone's name it may
only
be opened by that person or their secretary.

--- Seite 64 ---
7/10 Salutation
/ Complimentary close
In most cases the salutation and complimentary close in both letters and emails can be written without
punctuation and they are linked as shown in the table below. In general, it is always better to write toa
named person than a company but if this is not possible, start the letter ‘Dear Sir or Madam’ and use
Yours faithfully’
as the complimentary close
Salutation
Complimentaryclose
Formality
Notes
Dear Sir or Madam
Yours faithfully
formal
This is only used if the name
the person is unknown.
Dear Mr Green
"Yours sincerely
formal
This is the most commonly
Dear Ms Green
Best wishes
informal
used form.
Dear Miss Green
Dear
Mrs Green
Dear Customer
Dear Bill
Best wishes
informal
This can be used
in business
Dear Marilyn and Bill | Bestregards
the writers know each other.
Marilyn
Regards
Use the table below to find the right title in the salutation
Title
Example
‘Meaning
Miss
Miss (Gemma) Taylor
The woman (or girl) is unmarried.
Mrs (Gemma) Taylor
The woman is married.
Ms (Gemma) Taylor
The woman's marital status is unknown. This is the preferred
‘form of address in business correspondence (unless the woman
herself uses a different title)
‘Mr (James) Taylor
 Subjectline
This is written in bold letters
or underlined. it starts with a capital letter. The rest of the line is written
in small letters, apart from proper names, geographical names, nationalities
and languages,
etc.
9 Body of the letter
The first word always starts with a capital letter. The paragraphs are separated by a free line.
10 Complimentary close
7 above. The name of the sender's company
is written under the complimentary
close.
11 Signature
Signatures are often hard to read, so write the signatory's name and position under the signature.
As there is no real English equivalent to Sachbearbeiter/in, itis best to name the department where the
signatory works (e.g. ‘Sales Department’
for Verkaufssachbearbeiter/in). Women can add their preferred
title in brackets after their name if they wish.
12 Enclosure(s)
Itis often enough just to write ‘Enc’ or ‘Encs’ but, if necessary, details
of the enclosure(s) can be listed
like this: ‘Enc: Contract’ or Encs: Contracts:
a TM Bok,
Commercial correspondence
Rewrite these dates in the form dd (in figures) - mm (as a word) - yyyy (in figures).
Find the right complimentary close for these salutations.
Dear Mark
3 Dear
Ms Carter
5 Dear John and Jill
2 Andrea
4 Dear Gemma
6 DearSirorMadam
The following business letter contains 12 mistakes. In some cases there is something missing. Make a
list of all the mistakes you can find with a partner and compare them with other members of your class.
KDE GmbH
Bahnhofstr. 250
42369 Wuppertal
Flinders Global Ltd
Attn. Ms Hawk, Accounting Department
300 Johnson Street
VEREINIGTES KONIGREICH
Dear madams and sirs:
Translation into english of Contract no. 489
many thanks for your phone call
‘As requested,
a translation of the contract and our latest brochure are enclosed for your
information. The brochure contains details of all our latest products and services and also the
name of our representatives in the UK, who will be pleased to assist you at short notice.
Please contact us if you have any queries.
Yours faithfully
KDE GmbH
Mark Schuster
Mark Schuster
Finance Department

--- Seite 65 ---
Use the following inform:
n to show the correct layout of a business letter.
1 Alina Vogel in the Purchasing Department
of Druck & Grafik Bonrath GmbH, Sachsenstr.
2 Tamara Schmidt, who works in the Design Department
of Virnich GmbH, Holzstraße 350, 50931 Cologne, Germany,
Commercial correspondence
Informal email
_fionajones@printgold.bxt
Copy:
200, 45128 Essen, sends
a letter (ref. AV/IS)
sends
a letter (ref.TS/BK) to Ainsley Engineering
Healy Printing Ltd in Ireland (5 Cranberry Road,
Park Road, Doncaster
DO3 9WV, England. Frau Schmidt
From:
jillcooper@printgold.bxt
Attachment(s): sales.zip
Dublin 4, 004 H6C3).The letter is about order
wants Ms Judy Bakewell in the Export Department to
HiFiona
no. 86C dated 03/05/20... She does not have
the name
of the person who will read her
letter. The date is 4/07/20... Include the first
receive the letter, which is an offer for laser equipment.
She encloses two brochures. The date is 3/4/20... Include
the first word of the body of the letter.
Here are the figures you asked me for.
word of the body of the letter.
Talk soon
sill
Formal email
Informal email (see example opposite)
Lara Koch <lara.koch@kmm-metalltechnik.ger>
Tony Miles, Managing Director <t.miles@bmfl.bxt>
The salutation can also be ‘Hi/Hello’ or simply ‘Fiona’ If you are writing an email to lots of people,
you can also use ‘Dear All:
2 Body of the email
Start the body of the email with a capital letter.
3 Complimentary
close
A complimentary
close is not necessary but can be included. Common forms are also ‘Bye / See you soon /
Talk soon / Have a nice day.
Formal email (see example opposite)
Copy/cc (= carbon copy)
Email addresses entered here can be seen by all recipients.
2 Blind copy / Bcc
Email addresses entered here cannot be seen by the other recipients.
3 Subject
Make sure the subject box clearly shows what the email is about.
4/6 Salutation
The salutation is linked to the complimentary
close (6). Use ‘Dear Mr/Ms (+ name)’ and sign off with
Yours sincerely’ in formal emails. If you know the recipient well, use first names and sign off with ‘Best
wishes’
or Best regards! (See page 92.)
5 Bodyofthe email
Start the body of the email with a capital letter. Refer to any attachments to the email. Finish with a
polite phrase.
7 Name
Always use your full name.
8 Position
/ Name of company
State your position or department and the name of your company.
Leave
a free line for each dot (+).
Subject: Confirmation of order no. 382437 for 300 RBB units dated 29 August 20.
From:
—_jackjones@bmfl.bxt
Attachment(s): catalogue pdf
Dear Ms Koch
Many thanks for the above-mentioned order.
The goods will be delivered to your premises by 15 October 20.. as requested.
For your information, the latest edition of our company's catalogue is attached.
Please do not hesitate
to contact
us, should you have any queries.
Yours sincerely
Tony Miles
Sales Director
Brownrigg’s Metal Fabrication Ltd
Use the information below to write the layout of the following emails.
1 You work for BPG Trading
in Dortmund. You
send an informal email to your Irish colleague,
Fergus (fergus.nolan@bpg-trading ir!)
about a sales conference and attach a file
(conference.pdf). Your email address is: first
name.surname@bpg trading ger. Include
the first word of the body of the email
Finish with a friendly complimentary close.
2 You work
in the Sales Department
at Schüssel Möbelbau
GmbH in Kleve (email: first name surname
@smg ger). You
send a formal email to a new customer, Carol Brown (carol.
brown @quality-furniture.bxt), about an offer for office fur-
niture. You attach a file (special_offerpdf) and send a copy of
your email to your boss, Kevin Hahn (kevinhahn@smg
ger).
Include the first word of the body of the email. Finish your
email
with a polite phrase and a complimentary
close.
~8 J- e TB BOR
aakans-

--- Seite 66 ---
FOCUS on Business.
Materialie
Planunge
Commercial correspondence
The English company is called
2 George Burton is the
3 Andrea Johnson went to the MEDICA trade fair in Dortmund and visited the company’s
4 The German company buys and sells
5 Andrea Johnson is interested in the company's whole
You work in the Purchasing Department at Medizintechnik Dentlott GmbH in Cologne where the company
language is English. Last month you went to the MEDICA trade fair in Dortmund with your boss, Andrea
pany
Johnson.
She talked t
t different
booths and later sent th
ohnson.
she talked to a number
of companies at different
booths and later sent
them an enquity.
Read Andrea Johnson's email to a Chinese supplier and match the sentence halves.
Bie 2
Read the letter to an English company and complete the sentences on page 97.
Medizintechnik Dentlott GmbH
chenyulan@163.com
Wilmersdorfer str 199
andrea johnson@mt-dentiot.ger
2081 Cones
meee denotes
From:
 andreajohnson@mt-dentlott. ger
Attachment{s):
Germany
Tel.+49 22121814
Fax +49 221 21815
Dear Ms Chen Yu Lan
We note from your company’s website that you sella wide range of medical equipment al over the world
seien
My company is a well-established wholesaler both at home and abroad with many long-standing
customers all over Europe.
Mr George Burton
Export Director
We would welcome a favourable quotation for the following:
Brownrigg's Medical Instruments Ltd
Product:
KAB first-aid kit
47 Commercial Road
Quantity: 200
SHEFFIELD
Delivery:
FOB Ningbo
within 6 weeks
SE4 2G)
Please also let us know if you are able to provide samples.
UNITED KINGDOM
We look forward to hearing from you in the near future.
Dear Mr Burton
Yours sincerely
‘Andrea Johnson
Enquiry
Purchasing Director
Medizintechnik Dentlott GmbH
Iwas most impressed by the products you showed me at your booth at the MEDICA trade fair
last month. My company is a leading wholesaler of medical equipment with excellent business
contacts all over Europe and beyond.
Andrea Johnson is
2 She saw the company’s products
be sau
ifyou Br u
us nes
a commtende catalogue on your entire
3 She would ite the Chinese company
range and your export price
list, including all discounts.
4 She wants the Chinese exporters
‘We look forward to hearing from you soon.
price to
5 Six weeks is
Yours sincerely
onthe
Medizintechnik Dentlott GmbH
a ontheir website.
b the maximum delivery period.
interested in buying first-aid kits.
d to tell her how much the first-aid
kits will cost.
e include delivery to a Chinese port.
Andrea Johnson
Andrea Johnson
Purchasing Director
J- GF T BB BO A.

--- Seite 67 ---
E-Book - Unterrichtsmanager - Focus on Bu:
Use words from the letter and email on pages 96-97 to complete Andrea’s enquiry to an Indian
manufacturer. Use one word for each gap.
Dear Dr Narendra
We note from your company’s ==" that you sell medical =»? and would like more information
on your
My s4 imports
and exports a wide ==5 of equipment
from all over the world. Please
send us your
catalogue
and export m7 list, with details
of all ss granted.
Will you also send us a
m9 of the material used for bandages?
We look forward to
=="° from you soon.
Yours sincerely
Andrea Johnson
Purchasing Director
Medizintechnik Dentlott GmbH
‘Match the German phrases below with points 1-6.
on the checklist.
Beschreibung
Ihres Unternehmens - Grund
für Ihre
‚Anfrage + Herkunft
der Anschrift « héflicher Schluss + Ihr
Bedarf « Liefer- und Zahlungsbedingungen - Lieferung
Muster/Probe(n) - Preisangebot - Preisliste - Rabatte
Referenzen - Verkaufsmaterial - Vertreterbesuch
Your boss tells you to ask for a quotation for dental drills
from a Japanese supplier, but your computer crashes and
the email gets mixed up. Use the checklist to put sentences
a-g in the right order.
a Delivery would need to be made CIP Cologne-Bonn
Airport within six weeks.
b_ Ifyour product meets our requirements, we will be
ina position to place a substantial order.
© My company is a well-known wholesaler of medical
equipment both in Germany and abroad.
d_ Please send us a quotation for 100 drills, including
your terms of delivery and payment and all discounts.
e References are available on request.
f Weare extending our range at present and are
particularly interested in your NP6o dental drill.
g We have seen your company’s advertisement in
Dental Technology Today and are most interested
in your products.
EI source
of address
Bi description of your company
EI reason for your enquiry
EI) your requirements
quotation
sales material
price list
discounts
sample(s)
+ terms of delivery
and payment
delivery
representative's visit
E references
G polite ending
ess .5th NRW
Commercial correspondence
Scenario support, S. 190
Sie (eigener Name; E-Mail: vorname.nachname@wspg ger) sind Einkaufsleiter/in bei der
Firma Wellness Schönheitsprodukte GmbH, Kaiserallee 83, 76530 Baden-Baden. Vor 14 Tagen haben
Sie Herrn Justin Connor
am Stand seines Unternehmens auf der Schönheitsmesse BEAUTY in Dort
mund kennengelernt. Er ist Verkaufsleiter bei der britischen Firma Glamour Beauty Products Ltd
(2 Corporation Parade, Wigan, WI7 61D, Vereinigtes Königreich, E-Mail: j.connor@glamour-beauty.bxt).
Sein Unternehmen hat neulich eine neue Körperlotion namens Smooth!
auf den Markt gebracht,
und Sie möchten jetzt Näheres über dieses Produkt erfahren.
Nutzen Sie die Useful phrases (5. 100-101) und schreiben Sie eine Anfrage in Form einer E-Mail oder
eines Briefes an Herrn Connor unter Berücksichtigung folgender Punkte:
heutiges Datum
Bezug auf Schönheitsmesse vor 14 Tagen und die neue Lotion
Beschreibung Ihrer Firma:
—bedeutender deutscher Großhändler für Schönheitsprodukte im In- und Ausland
—langjahrige Kunden in ganz Europa
Bitte um günstiges Angebot für die Lotion Smooth! sowie Übersendung eines aktuellen
Katalogs mit Preisliste
Liefer- und Zahlungsbedingungen?
Referenzen auf Wunsch erhältlich
Aussicht auf größeren Auftrag, wenn die Produkte Ihren Anforderungen entsprechen
héflicher Schluss
Sie (eigener Name) sind Einkaufsleiter/in bei der LeckerSchmeck GmbH (Hinseler Hof 200,
45277 Essen; E-Mail: vorname.nachname@|s-gmbh ger). Ihre Firma ist ein etablierter deutscher
Großhändler für Lebensmittel mit vielen langjährigen Kunden in ganz Europa. Sie erweitern gegen-
wärtig Ihr Sortiment und möchten englische Orangenmarmelade nach Deutschland einführen.
Sie haben eine Anzeige der Winterbottom Ltd (701 Commercial Road, London EC3A 7EX, Vereinigtes
Königreich) in der aktuellen Ausgabe von Wholesalers’ Weekly gesehen und setzen sich mit dem
Unternehmen in Verbindung
Nutzen Sie die Useful phrases (S. 100-101) und schreiben Sie eine Anfrage in Form einer E-Mail oder
eines Briefes an die Exportabteilung der englischen Firma unter Berücksichtigung folgender Punkte:
heutiges Datum
Ansprechpartnerin: Ms Jan Winters, Export Sales Director (E-Mail: .winters@johnson-plc.bxt)
Bezug auf Anzeige
Beschreibung Ihrer Firma
Grund Ihrer Anfrage
Sie hatten gerne ein günstiges Preisangebot für 1.000 Dosen Orangenmarmelade (tins of
marmalade) vom Typ Orange Bliss, einschl. aller gewährten Rabatte.
Proben zur Verfügung stellen?
Lieferung CPT unsere Geschäftsräume
bis Ende des Monats erforderlich
Referenz auf Wunsch erhältlich
héflicher Schluss
| SKILLS CHECKLIST |
Writing business letters
5 Have | checked the layout of the letter/email?
5 Have | used the Useful phrases?
©] Have | checked my spelling and grammar?

--- Seite 68 ---
Enquiries
was most impressed by the .. (products) you showed me
on your stand / at your booth at the... (name
of trade fair /
exhibition).
We recently visited your company's booth at the .. (name)
trade fair.
We have seen your company’s advertisement in the current
edition
of ... (name of publication)
and are most interested
in your products.
You have been recommended to us by... (name
of the person/
company),
We note from your company’s website that you sell a wide
range of...
(product).
and are particularly interested in importing ... (product).
‘My company is / We are a rapidly growing / leading
importer/manufacturer/wholesaler
of... (goods) with
excellent business contacts all over...
(place) and beyond.
‘My/Our company is a major/well-established (German)
wholesaler of... (goods,
e.g. cosmetic products) both at
home and abroad.
We are a service company in the field of...
(e.g. logistics/
electronics).
We have many long-standing customers all over Europe.
At present,
we are particularly interested in .. (goods/
services) at reasonable prices, as goods of this nature are in
great demand at present.
we are extending our range at present, we are
particularly interested in ... (product)
Quotation
Please send us a favourable quotation for the following /
for these items /or.. (product)
We would welcome a (favourable) quotation for
a TM Bok,
Ich war von den ... (Produkte),
die Sie mir an Ihrem Stand
auf der... (Name der Handelsmesse/Ausstellung)
zeigten,
höchst beeindruckt.
Wir haben kürzlich Ihren Stand auf der ... (Name) Messe
besucht.
Wir haben Ihre Anzeige in der aktuellen Ausgabe von
(Name der Veröffentlichung) gesehen und interessieren uns
sehr für Ihre Produkte.
Sie wurden uns von ... (Name der Person/Firma) empfohlen.
Wir entnehmen der Homepage
Ihres Unternehmens, dass
Sie ein breites Sortiment an...
(Produkt) anbieten,
und sind zurzeit besonders daran interessiert, .. (Produkt)
zu importieren.
‘Meine Firma ist / Wir sind ein schnell wachsender
/ führender
Importeur/Hersteller
von ... / Großhändler
für ... (Waren)
hervorragenden Geschäftskontakten in ganz ... (Ort) und
darüber hinaus.
Meine/Unsere Firma ist ein bedeutender/etablierter
(deutscher) Großhändler von ... (Waren, z.B. Kosmetika)
im In- und Ausland.
Wir sind ein Dienstleistungsunternehmen auf dem Gebiet
(2.B. der Logistik/Elektronik).
Wir haben viele langjährige Kunden in ganz Europa,
Gegenwärtig gilt unser besonderes Interesse ... (Waren/
Dienstleistungen) zu angemessenen Preisen, da eine große
Nachfrage nach Waren dieser Art zurzeit besteht.
Da wir gegenwärtig unser Sortiment erweitern, sind wir
besonders
an ... (Produkt) interessiert.
(Preis-JAngebot
Bitte schicken Sie uns ein günstiges (Preis-)Angebot wie folgt /
fiir diese Artikel / fiir ... (Produkt).
Wir hätten gerne ein (günstiges) (Preis-JAngebot für
Sales material
We would therefore/also be grateful if you could let us have
a comprehensive catalogue of your entire range,
Please let us have your latest catalogue
Price list
and (your) export price list
Discounts
including all discounts granted
Samples
Please also let us know if you are able to provide samples.
Terms of delivery and payment
including details of your terms of delivery and payment.
Details of your terms of delivery and payment would also
be appreciated
Delivery would need to be made ...(Incoterms® rule, eg.
CPT our premises)
Delivery
We would require delivery
(e.g. within 6 weeks / by the
end of the month)
Representative's visit
We would be grateful if a representative could call on us.
References are available on request.
If your products meet our requirements, we will be in a
position to place a substantial order.
We hope to hear from you soon.
We look forward to hearing from you soon / in the near
future.
We look forward to your early reply with interest.
Commercial correspondence
Verkaufsmaterial
Wir wären Ihnen deshalb/auch dankbar, wenn Sie uns einen
umfassenden Katalog über Ihre gesamte Produktpalette
zukommen lassen könnten.
Bitte lassen Sie uns Ihren aktuellen Katalog zukommen.
Preisliste
und (Ihre) Exportpreisliste
Rabatte
einschließlich aller gewährten Rabatte
Muster/Proben
Bitte teilen Sie uns auch mit, ob Sie Muster/Proben zur
Verfügung stellen können.
Liefer- und Zahlungsbedingungen
einschl. Einzelheiten über Ihre Liefer- und Zahlungs
bedingungen.
Einzelheiten über Ihre Liefer- und Zahlungsbedingungen
würden wir ebenfalls begrüßen.
Die Lieferung müsste ... (Incoterms®-Klausel, .B.CPT unsere
Geschäftsräume) erfolgen.
Lieferung
Die Lieferung bräuchten
wir... (z.B. innerhalb
von 6 Wochen /
bis Ende des Monats),
Vertreterbesuch
Wir wären dankbar, wenn uns ein/e Außendienst.
mitarbeiter/in besuchen könnte.
Referenzen sind auf Wunsch erhältlich.
Wenn Ihre Produkte unseren Anforderungen entsprechen,
werden wir uns imstande sehen, Ihnen einen größeren
Auftrag
zu erteilen.
Wir hoffen, bald von Ihnen zu hören.
Wir freuen uns, bald / in Kürze von Ihnen zu hören,
Wir sehen Ihrer baldigen Antwort mit Interesse entgegen.

--- Seite 69 ---
Commercial correspondence
Calculate the unit price of one e-bike from the French supplier delivered CIP Dortmund and add it
to your checklist.
You work in the Purchasing Department of BPG Trading Ltd in Dortmund, where the company language is
English. There is now an increasing demand
for e-bikes, so Emma Perry, the Purchasing Director, wants
test the market with an initial order for 50 units.
Next you contact a Chinese supplier in Changzhou
via online chat.
Read through the chat and add the details to your
Emma Perry asks you to contact three potential
suppliers and compare their offers
using a checklist.
checklist.
The first offer comes from a French supplier. Copy the checklist below and complete it with the details
Fading
Ge Amanda ti
of the offer you receive.
Hello, this is BPG Trading
in Germany.
L, Hello, this is Amanda from Zhang Electrics.
How can | help you?
Dear Ms Perry
Many thanks for the above-mentioned enquiry.
Good morning, Amanda. We’reinterestedin
We are a major distributor of bicycles and e-bikes with an excellent reputation throughout Europe.
SoS Sones
Ly Le ave populat model and only costs
‘As regards the goods requested, we are pleased to submit the following quotation
Article:
GBFT-95 e-bike
Eaton FOR BEER
Basic price
€550.00 FCA Grenoble
L, Yes, that's FOB Shanghai
Discount:
10% on orders for 50 or more units
Thanks. Do you offer any discounts?
Shipping charge: _€1,000.00 for delivery of 50 units CIP Dortmund by road
ERS ge eg
Pa ere
Payment:
WO or by L/C for an initial order; 10 days
2%, 30 days
net for regular orders
L, Bess ee Braut
avery
good queanuny clscour
Deliver
within
hours
after
receipt of order
10% if you order 200 units.
elivery
jours
after
receipt of orde
Well, we only want 50 at the moment and we
‘SIS
yeas
require delivery CIP Dortmund. Can you deliver
Please refer to the attached brochure
on the GBFT-95 e-bike for further information.
to Dortmund?
Yes, we can arrange that. 50 e-bikes delivered
We feel sure that atrial order will convince
you of the quality of our products
and look forward
to doing
L, cip Dortmund will cost. just checking .
Thanks. What is your delivery period to
Yours sincerely
Dortmund?
Baal
> 28 days. We have a very good shipping agent
Cycles Dufort SA
and €350 is a very low basic price.
Yes, but we will have to pay 25% more on that
price in import tax and customs duty. That's...
just let me work it out...
€4,375 for 50 e-bikes,
Supplier | Cycles Dufort SA. | Zhang Electrics,
Maloney’s Cycles Ltd,
bike
Bee en nn
which makes the unit price €461.50.
L, But that's still better than other manufacturers.
Quantity required
Perhaps.
What
terms
Model
L, 30% with order,
70% before loading.
Basic price
Incoterms® rule
Guantty dikenune
Ee Sal uci ES
Yes, but we will send you photographs
of the
> load before it leaves Shanghai.
mice wh quent
OK. And your guarantee period?
Shipping charge CIP Dortmund
Delivery period
Import tax and customs duty
L, 2 years. Would you like to order 50 now?
| must talk
to my colleagues first. Ill be in
Unit price
touch.
Terms of payment
_> lunderstand. Thank you and have a nice day.
Guarantee
Thanks. You too.
© 7-8 T FBO

--- Seite 70 ---
Finally you contact an Irish supplier who phones you back and leaves a voice message
Listen to the recording and add the details of the offer
to your checklist.
Sich
id des Hö
Calculate the unit price of one e-bike from the
CIP Dortmund and add it to your checklist.
supplier delivered
When you have completed the checklist, the Purchasing Director asks you to compare the offers.
Use the words in brackets to compare the following aspects:
Compa
the basic prices (high/low)
the delivery periods (short/long)
the quantity discounts (big/small)
the guarantees (short/long)
the unit prices including
quantity discounts (big/small)
Start like this:
The French supplier’s basic price is the highest
at ... . The Irish supplier’s price is €50
lower but the Chinese supplier's price is the lowest at
You check your company's intranet
to understand some of the words and phrases used for delivery.
‘Match the German terms in the list below with pı
its 1-15
of the diagram.
irport, terminal,
LE) premises
port/place of destination
[seller
[loading
Epre-caria
4 [5] first carier
Bleontract
2 A og main carriage
import 2 my
clearance FW
Mexport
© airport,
seminal,
unloading
[B]portof shipment
lbuyer
‘Ausfuhrabfertigung - Beladen - Einfuhrabfertigung - Entladen - Frachtführer - Fracht-/Beförderungs-
vertrag + Geschäftsräume - Flughafen, Terminal, Bestimmungshafen/-ort - Flughafen, Terminal, Ort
Hauptlauf/Haupttransport Käufer « Nachlauf/Nachtransport » Verkäufer - Verschiffungshafen
Vorlauf/Vortransport
Commercial correspondence
Next you discuss an information sheet about the Incoterms® rules with a German colleague.
Read the information sheet and do the tasks below.
Incoterms® rules: information sheet
The Incoterms® rules are used by importers and exporters.
to define the costs and risks of international trade.
Transport costs
fan F term is used, the seller
is only responsible
for the
pre-carriage part of the goods’ journey to their destination.
In practice, this means that the seller
only loads the goods
on the first carrier's vehicle, eg. at the seller's premises,
or pays for transporting the goods to a convenient location
not too far away, e.g. a nearby port, airport or train station,
and loading the goods at that location, e.g. at the port
of shipment. The buyer
is then responsible for arranging
a contract
of carriage to transport the goods to their
destination and for unloading them when they arrive
Ifa C term is used, the seller pays
the costs of the main carriage to the destination but not of unloading
at the destination. Post-carriage is the buyer's responsibility.
In the case of a D term, the seller pays all transport costs until the goods have reached their destination.
Risks
With an F term, the seller bears the risk until the goods have been handed over to the first carrier, e.g
at the seller's premises, or in the case
of FOB until the goods are on board a ship at the port of shipment
With CPT and CIP, the risk to the seller is the same because it passes to the buyer when the goods have
been collected by the first carrier. In the case of CIP, the seller also insures the goods for the main carriage
but no longer bears any risk when they have been handed over
to the first carrier.
D terms cover all risks until the goods have reached their destination.
Import and export clearance
Export clearance (e.g. export licences, documentation) is arranged and paid for by the seller. Import
clearance (e.g. customs duty, import licences and documentation) is arranged and paid for by the buyer.
Erklären Sie mit Hilfe des Texts, ..
Rezer
stehen,
welche Transportkosten der Verkäufer bei einer F-Incoterms®-Klausel übernimmt.
Geben Sie zwei Beispiele an.
wer bei einer C-Incoterms®-Klausel die Kosten für den Haupttransport trägt.
wer bei einer C-Incoterms®-Klausel die Entladungskosten trägt.
welche Transportkosten der Käufer bei einer D-Incoterms®-Klausel trägt.
bis zu welchem Punkt der Verkäufer bei FOB das Risiko trägt.
bis zu welchem Punkt der Verkäufer bei CPT und CIP das Risiko trägt.
wer das Risiko bei einer D-Incoterms®-Klausel trägt.
wer für die Besorgung einer Einfuhrgenehmigung zuständig ist.
wer die Kosten einer Ausfuhrgenehmigung trägt.
vonanauwn

--- Seite 71 ---
ocus on Business
You now have enough information to understand the definitions of the Incoterms® rules used in the
offers. Copy and complete the table below with data from the three definitions.
— FREE ON BOARD
(... named port of shipment)
The seller is not responsible for the main carriage of the goods. The seller delivers the goods at their
own expense and risk, in the customary packing, cleared for export, on board the vessel selected
by the buyer unless otherwise agreed, at the named port of shipment. Thereafter, the buyer bears
all the costs and risks of transporting
the goods to their destination.
FCA — FREE CARRIER (... named place of delivery) Multimodal transport
The seller is not responsible for the main carriage of the goods. The seller delivers the goods at their
own expense and risk, in the customary packing, cleared for export to the carrier nominated by
the buyer. The seller provides the commercial invoice and, if requested, a certificate of origin at
the buyer's expense. If the goods are collected at the seller's premises, the seller loads the goods
The seller bears the risks until the goods are in the custody of the first carrier. After that the
buyer bears all the costs and risks of transporting the goods to their destination.
CIP — CARRIAGE AND INSURANCE PAID TO (... named place of destination)
Multimodal transport The seller pays for the main carriage of the goods. The seller delivers the
goods in the customary packing, cleared for export to the carrier which they nominate. The seller
bears the risk until the goods have been delivered into the custody of the first carrier. The seller
pays the transport costs for the goods, including transport insurance, up to the named destination.
The buyer pays all import duties and taxes.
‘Main carriage | Seller bears risk
Seller
Export
Loading
Import | Unloading
insures
clearance
clearance
for main
carriage
paid | unpaid including | excluding
main | main
carriage | carriage
B= buyer
/ 5 = eller
Beantworten Sie folgende Fragen auf Deutsch.
Rezept
everstehen,
Welche der drei Incoterms®-Klauseln beinhaltet die Kosten des Haupttransports?
2 Wer iibernimmt bei allen drei Incoterms®-Klauseln die Beladungskosten?
3 Wer übernimmt bei allen drei Incoterms®-Klauseln die Entladungskosten?
4 Welche Incoterms®-Klausel ist nur für den Seetransport bestimmt?
J- GF T BB BO A.
Commercial correspondence
You also find an explanation of terms of payment on your company's intranet
Terms
of payment
Before the buyer and seller sign a contract of sale they must first agree when and how payment will be made.
Ideally, the seller would like payment in advance before starting work on the order and the buyer would like
a long time to pay for the goods, so they can be sold before they are paid for. In practice, ifthe seller trusts the
customer, for example if the customer places regular orders, or if a new customer can show good references
from other sellers, the seller will give a credit period of perhaps 30, 60 or 90 days. Some trusted customers get
open account terms, which means that they pay for the goods at the end of the month or quarter. If the seller
doesn’t know or doesn't trust the customer, the terms of payment will be payment in advance, cash with
order (CWO) or payment by letter of credit (L/C), which means that the buyer’s bank guarantees payment.
The table shows some typical terms of payment and whether they are good or bad for the buyer and seller.
Importer/
Exporter/
Buyer
Seller
payment in advance (TT)
Vorauszahlung/Vorkasse (telegr. Überweisung)
®& cash with order (CWO)
Barzahlung bei Auftragserteilung
payment by L/C (letter of credit) | Zahlung per Akkreditiv.
30% with order, 70% before loading | 30% bei Auftragserteilung, 70% vor Verladung
Ys with order, Ys on delivery,
1% bei Auftragserteilung, Ya bei Lieferung,
30/60/90 days after delivery | 7 30/60/90 Tage nach Lieferung
TO days 2%
2% Skonto Zahlung innerhalb 10 Tagen
30 days net
30 Tage netto
open account terms (with monthly/ | offenes Zahlungsziel mit monatlicher/viertel-
quarterly settlement)
jahrlicher Abrechnung
Use the information from the text and the table to match the sentence halves.
The terms fora new customer
a often get up to 90 days to pay.
2. Ifpayment is made by letter of credit,
b open account terms with quarterly settlement.
3 Trusted customers
© the buyer gets a small discount if he pays early.
4 Ifthe terms are 10 days 2%,
d the buyer's bank guarantees payment.
5 The best terms for the buyer are
e are often CWO.
With a partner study the table above and find suitable terms of payment for the following situations.
1 Anew customer in South America contacts you via your company's website and is interested
in buying goods worth €10,000.
2. Anew customer places four orders worth a total of €20,000 over three months and pays
CWO each time. The customer now asks you for better terms of payment.
3 Aregular customer with open account terms and quarterly settlement starts paying your
invoices 6-8 weeks late.
4 Acustomer orders special machinery for his factory worth €100,000 from your company.
You will need to buy materials worth €30,000 before you can start making the machinery.

--- Seite 72 ---
Commercial correspondence
f Weare major distributor of electrical equipment with an excellent reputation throughout
Europe.
The Purch
Direct:
of the
e-bik
PERSIE, IEEE BETS YOO FD IPCOMIMERS ONE
OF NIE
EDER SUPPISTE
g Wefeel sure that
a trial order will convince you of the quality of our products and look forward
Review the three offers and make a recommendation by email to emma.perry @bpg-trading.ger or
to doing business with you.
as a telephone message. Give reasons for your choice and include the following points:
h We were delighted to receive your enquiry dated 10 March 20.. about our air conditioners.
price
import tax and customs duty
RofienbasiorteStellangpanme;
discounts
terms of delivery
guarantee
Scenario support, S.190
delivery period
termsofpayment
your recommendation
Sie (eigener Name; E-Mail: vorname.nachname@brag ger) arbeiten in der Verkaufsabteilung
der Firma Bloemen Recyclinganlagen GmbH, Kalkarer Str. 300, 47533 Kleve. Ihr Unternehmen hat einen
hervorragenden Ruf sowohl in Europa als auch in Afrika. Heute Morgen erhielten Sie einen Anruf von
Frau Joyce Gadanya, Einkaufsleiterin der Firma Ecofocus Services Ltd, Cadestrial Zone A6, Jahi District,
Abuja, Nigeria. Das nigerianische Unternehmen interessiert
sich für eine Sortiermaschine. Ihre Firma
hat momentan eine gebrauchte Anlage auf Lager, die evtl. den Anforderungen des nigerianischen
Unternehmens entspricht.
As far as the basic unit price is concerned, the ...offer is the lowest/highest/best because its €...
cheaper / more/less expensive than the others.
The discount offered by the .. supplier is 10% on orders for...
units, which makes no difference /
a (big) difference of €... per unit.
As regards the delivery period, the ... supplier's offer is ... the shortest/longest.
Import tax and customs duty must/needn't be added because the...
supplier is inside/outside the EU.
Nutzen Sie die Useful phrases (S. 110-1) und schreiben Sie ein Angebot in Form einer E-Mail oder eines
As regards the terms of delivery, the FOB/FCA price offered by the ... supplier (only) covers loading at the
Briefes an Ms Gadanya unter Beriicksichtigung folgender Punkte:
seller's premises / loading and transport to a local/nearby port but does not cover the main carriage.
nteraktion
häftskorn
heutiges Datum
Inthe short term, all three suppliers’ terms of payment are similar
/ the same because each supplier
rien, am
requires payment in advance / early payment for a new customer.
Beschreibung Ihres Unternehmens
However, in the long term, the ... supplier's offer is more/less favourable because there will be no / a better
Angebot über eine Sortiermaschine (sorting machine) vom Typ B44 Power Separator,
discount on larger orders and the terms of payment will be better / the same if we place regular orders.
ein Jahr alt, zu US$ 50.000
The ... supplier's guarantee is ... and/but (easily) enough for our customers / the EU.
Lieferbedingungen CIF Lagos
After considering all these factors, | recommend that we / | suggest that we
Zahlungsbedingungen Kasse bei Auftragserteilung oder per Akkreditiv
Lieferung sofort ab Lager
héflicher Schluss
OFFERS CHECKLIST
reference to enquiry
description of your company/goods/services
sales material
You are transferred to the Sales Department where
one of your tasks is to send offers to customers.
Sie (eigener Name) arbeiten in der Exportabteilung der Firma German Paper Products GmbH
in Paderborn (Busdorfwall 100, 33098 Paderborn, Germany; E-Mail: vorname.nachname@gppg ger).
Ihr Unternehmen stellt eine breite Palette von hochwertigen Papierprodukten her und hat bereits
Use words from the list to translate the offers
viele zufriedene Kunden überall in der EU und darüber hinaus. Sie erhalten eine E-Mail
/ einen Brief
gBenmnmnn
checklist (1-8) into German.
price
ME pees
von Ms July Dickinson in der Einkaufsabteilung der Firma Eldarin Stationers SA, 7 Quince Street,
Pretoria 0186, Südafrika (E-Mail: j.dickinson@eldarin-stationers.saf). Die südafrikanische Firma ist
‘Anlage(n)/Anhang/Anhange - Beschreibung
delivery
am Import von Kopierpapier interessiert.
Ihrer Firma/Waren/Dienstleistungen
polite ending
Bezug auf Anfrage + Geschäftsbedingungen
enclosure(s)/attachment(s)
Nutzen Sie die Useful phrases (5. 10-11) und schreiben Sie ein Angebot in Form einer E-Mail oder eines
und Rabatte « höfliche Schlussformel
Briefes an Ms Dickinson unter Berücksichtigung folgender Punkte:
eferung Preise Verkaufsmaterial
Letters have enclosures; emails have attachments.
heutiges Datum
Dank für Anfrage vom
.... (vor fünf Tagen)
The first email you write gets mixed up. Use the checklist to put the paragraphs (a-h) in the right order.
Beschreibung Ihres Unternehmens
aktueller Katalog und Preisliste sind beigefügt
Muster auf Wunsch erhältlich
Preise verstehen sich CIP Flughafen Pretoria
Zahlungsbedingungen bei einem Erstauftrag: 30 % bei Auftragserteilung, 70% vor Verladung
Lieferung innerhalb 14 Tagen nach Auftragseingang
+ Hoffnung auf baldigen Probeauftrag
a Asregards the goods requested, we will be pleased to supply you with 10 VCH-99 air
conditioners at €350 each.
b Brochure
Delivery is made within seven days after receipt of order.
d Ourprices are quoted FCA Dortmund. Wholesalers are granted a trade discount of 20%.
If regular orders are placed with our company, open account terms may be granted
e Please refer to the attached brochure for further information on our entire range

--- Seite 73 ---
# Supply, deliver and ship
A company
that supplies goods makes them available
to other companies
or buyers. A supplier is
normally a manufacturer, wholesaler
or retailer.
A company that delivers goods collects them from the supplier and transports them to their destination
A company that offers this service is called a forwarder, freight forwarder or forwarding agent (all modes
of transport); a ha
is only involved in road transport.
A company
that ships goods sends
or transports them. Goods can be shipped by air, road, rail and sea
Offers
‘As agreed in our pleasant telephone conversation of this
morning / of today
We were delighted to receive your enquiry dated ... about.
our .. (products)
Many thanks for the above-mentioned enquiry /
your enquiry dated
and feel sure we can supply you with all the goods
you need
! am pleased to let you have details
of our offer in writing.
We are a major distributor
of... (eg. recycling equipment)
with an excellent reputation throughout the European
Union and beyond.
Our company manufactures a wide range
of high-quality
products
and already has many satisfied customers throughout
Europe and North America,
Please refer
to the attached brochure on the ... (article,
GBFT-95 e-bike) for further information.
We enclose our current catalogue and price list for your
information.
To download our latest comprehensive catalogue and
export pricelist, please visit our website at
wwwbpg-trading ger.
‘Samples are available on request.
Wie heute (Morgen) in unserem netten Telefonat
vereinbart,
Wir waren sehr erfreut, Ihre Anfrage
vom ... zu unseren
(Produkten) zu erhalten.
Wir danken für die oben genannte Anfrage
/ Ihre Anfrage
und sind sicher, dass wir Ihnen die Waren liefern können,
die Sie benötigen.
Es freut mich, Ihnen ein schriftliches Angebot zukommen
zu lassen.
Wir sind ein bedeutender Großhändler für .. (z.B. Recycling.
anlagen)
mit einem hervorragenden Ruf
in der
EU und darüber
hinaus.
Unser Unternehmen stellt eine breite Palette hochwertiger
Produkte her
und hat bereits
viele zufriedene Kunden überall in Europa
und Nordamerika.
Weitere Informationen können dem beigefügten Prospekt
über ... (Artikel, z.B. E-Bike GBFT-95) entnommen werden.
Zu Ihrer Information legen wir unseren aktuellen Katalog
und die Preisliste bei
Um unseren neuesten Gesamtkatalog und die Exportpreis
liste herzunterzuladen, besuchen Sie bitte unsere Homepage
unter www.bpg-trading ger.
‘Muster sind auf Wunsch erhältlich.
ETEEOo%-
As regards the goods requested, we are pleased to submit
the following quotation
and will be pleased to supply you with 50 e-bikes at
€350,00 each.
at US$100.00 per unit
Our price is quoted CIF Lagos / FCA our premises.
Delivery will be made CIP Frankfurt Airport
Wholesalers are granted a trade/cash discount of...%.
A quantity discount of ..% is granted on orders for 10 or
more .. (e.g. machines, items).
Our terms of payment for an initial order are CWO.
Our (usual) terms of payment are CWO by bank transfer
or letter of credit.
or, with favourable references, 10 days 2%, 30 days net
(for regular orders).
Regular customers may be granted preferential terms.
If regular orders are placed with our company, open account
terms may be granted.
Delivery will be made within
(e.g. 14/30 days) days after
receipt of order.
Delivery can be made immediately from stock.
while stocks last
We hope our offer is to your liking.
Please do not hesitate to contact us if you require further
details.
We look forward to receiving your order.
We feel sure that a trial order will convince
you of the
quality of our products.
and look forward to doing business
with you.
Commercial correspondence
Was die gewünschten Waren betrifft, freuen wir uns,
Ihnen folgendes Angebot zu unterbreiten
und liefern Ihnen gerne 50 E-Bikes zu je 350,00 €
zu 100,00 US$ pro Stück
Unser Preis versteht sich CIF Lagos / FCA unsere
Geschäftsräume.
Die Lieferung erfolgt CIP Flughafen Frankfurt.
GroBhandlern wird ein Handels-/Barzahlungsrabatt
(Skonto)
von ... % eingeräumt.
Bei Abnahme
von 10 oder mehr...
(z.B. Geräten, Artikeln)
gewähren wir einen Mengenrabatt von...
Unsere Zahlungsbedingungen für einen Erstauftrag sind
Kasse bei Auftragserteilung,
Unsere (üblichen) Zahlungsbedingungen sind Kasse bei
Auftragserteilung per Überweisung oder per Akkreditiv.
oder bei günstigen Referenzen 2 % Skonto bei Zahlung
innerhalb von 10 Tagen, netto bei Zahlung innerhalb von
30 Tagen (bei regelmäßigen Aufträgen)
Stammkunden können Vorzugskonditionen eingeräumt
werden.
Wenn unserer Firma regelmäßige Aufträge erteilt werden,
kann ein offenes Zahlungsziel gewährt werden.
Die Lieferung erfolgt innerhalb...
(z.8. 4/30 Tagen) nach
Auftragseingang.
Die Lieferung kann sofort ab Lager erfolgen
solange der Vorrat reicht
Wir hoffen, dass unser Angebot Ihnen zusagt.
Bitte zögern Sie nicht, mit uns Kontakt aufzunehmen, wenn
Sie weitere Einzelheiten benötigen.
Uber einen Auftrag würden wir uns sehr freuen.
Wir sind sicher, dass ein Probeauftrag Sie von der Qualität
unserer Produkte überzeugen wird.
und freuen uns, mit Ihnen in Geschäftsbeziehungen
zutreten.

--- Seite 74 ---
Commercial correspondence
Lesen Sie die Einleitung und Bestellung und beantworten Sie folgende Fragen.
Warum hat die BPG Trading GmbH inzwischen bessere Konditionen beim französischen
You work in the Purchasing Department
of BPG Trading GmbH in Dortmund, where the company
iis?
language is English. Your company is now
a regular customer with Cycles Dufort S.A. in Grenoble and
has mike factable teriné cf omfrhent.
2 Wann hat der französische Lieferant der deutschen Firma ein neues Angebot gemacht?
Nenn
3 Welchen Vorteil hat die BPG Trading GmbH, wenn sie binnen zehn Tagen zahlt?
ORDERS
4 Wohin wird die Ware geliefert:
5_ Wann ist mit der Ankunft der Ware zu rechnen?
6 Welches Dokument wird der Kunde als Nächstes erhalten?
The French supplier has just offered BPG Trading GmbH a special discount if 50 items or more are ordered,
ORDERS CHECKLIST
so the company places the order below.
EI reference
to offer
Ei details of goods/services
ordered
EI price(s) and discount(s)
EI delivery
Incoterm® rule
delivery date/period
Use words from the list to translate the orders checklist
(1-8) into German.
Angaben über die bestellten Waren/Dienstleistungen
Anlage(n)/Anhang/Anhange - Bestätigung/Versand
anzeige - Bezug
auf Angebot - höflicher Schluss
panniers
28 June
Ar Florian Leclerc
internationale Handelsklausel + Liefertermin/-zeit
Hansporz
sales Dretor
Lieferung - Preis(e) und Rabatt(e) Verpackung
: BER
Brenn
Versand - Versicherung - Zahlung
38000 GRENOBLE
acknowledgement / advice of dispatch
FRANKREICH
H polite ending
EI enclosure(s)/attachment(s)
Dear Mr Leclerc
Order no. EB/001 for e-bikes and panniers
Study the example in the box and the order opposite then write out the following prices in figures.
Many thanks for your offer dated
24 June 20.
a hundred dollars
Currency sign first
Writing prices
We now wish to place an order for the following goods:
2 five thousand dollars
no space
3 ten pounds and fifty pence
‘Comma where there
Quantity
Articleno. | Unit price
Total
4 twenty thousand euros and seventy-five cents
isa point in German
GBFT-95 | €51500
eighty-two dollars and sixty-seven cents
Point where
pannier
| BFP-100 | €50.00
6 thirty pence
foes.
Subtotal | €28,25000
7 nine euros and ninety-nine cents
5% special discount | -€1,41250
8 amillioneuros
Subtotal2 | €26,83750
+VAT (20%) | €5,36750
Total price | €32,205.00
Terms of delivery:
CIP Dortmund
Terms
of payment:
2 days, 30 days net
Packing
sturdy cartons
Delivery
within 48 hours
after receipt of order
We look forward to receiving your advice of dispatch and trust the goods will arrive punctually
and in good condition.
Yours sincerely
BPG Trading GmbH
WoK <

--- Seite 75 ---
If you are writing about two or more items, use a table with headings (see page 112) to make your order
easy
to understand. If you are only writing about one item, just use headings, as below:
Article:
safety helmet
Article no.:
Quantity:
List price:
10% quantity discount:
Subtot:
Shipping charge:
VAT 20%:
Total price:
Terms of delivery:
DAP Aachen
Nutzen Sie folgende Angaben, um eine Bestellung als Tabelle und Liste - oder nur in Form einer
zu strukturieren. Wählen Sie geeignete Überschriften aus der Liste.
Article
no. - Cash discount - Delivery + Description + Insurance - Packing - Payment - Quantity
Quantity discount + Size « Subtotal - Total + Total price - Trade discount » Transport « Unit price
A Sie bestellen 10 Klarinetten (clarinets), Artikel-Nr. KT450,
zu je 75,00€ und 60 Blockflöten (recorders), Artikel-Nr.
R200, Stückpreis 25,00
€. Es wird ein Handlerrabatt von
30% (- 675,00€) in Abzug gebracht und Mehrwertsteuer
in Höhe von 20% (315,00€) berechnet. Errechnen Sie die
Zwischensumme und den Gesamtbetrag.
Die Ware wird in stabilen Kartons innerhalb 30 Tagen nach
Auftragseingang CFR Hamburg geliefert, Zahlungsbedin-
‚gungen sind Kasse bei Auftragserteilung.
B Sie erteilen einem Lieferanten einen Auftrag über
1.000 schwarze Schreibtischlampen (desk lamps), Modell
‚Vintage‘, Artikel-Nr. AP4L721, Stückpreis 50,00 €. Geben
Sie bei Ihrer Bestellung die Zwischensumme nach
Gewährung eines 5%igen Mengenrabatts (- 2.500,00€)
an. Fügen Sie anschließend Versandkosten in Höhe von
200,00€ und 25% Mehrwertsteuer (11.925,00€) hinzu
und errechnen Sie den Gesamtpreis.
Die Ware wird innerhalb von 14 Tagen CIP Paderborn in
einem Container geliefert. Die Zahlungsbedingungen sind
per Akkreditiv und die Garantiezeit beträgt fünf Jahre.
Commercial correspondence
Scenario support, 5.191
Sie (eigener Name) sind Einkaufsleiter/-in bei der Go!Sport AG, Von-Ketteler-StraBe 500,
51371 Leverkusen (E-Mail: vorname.nachname@go-sport ger). Ihr Unternehmen hat ein Angebot
über Schlafsäcke von der Firma Taylor Outdoor Sport Ltd, 250 Neville St, Cardiff CF11 6LP,
Vereinigtes Königreich, erhalten und möchte nun einen Probeauftrag erteilen.
Nutzen Sie die Useful phrases (S. 116-117) und schreiben Sie einen Probeauftrag in Form einer E-Mail
oder eines
Briefes an den britischen Lieferanten unter Berücksichtigung folgender Punkte:
heutiges Datum
+  zuHd.Ms Judie French, Verkaufsabteilung
(E-Mail: judie french @tos-Itd.bxt)
«Bezug
auf Angebot von vor fünf Tagen
Referenzen bei Brief: Ihre Initialen + /BT
Artikel-Nr. ESBq90
Beschreibung: XXtreme sleeping bag
+ Menge:10
Stiickpreis: 80,00
Handlerrabatt 25%:—200,00£
Versand:50,00£
+ Mehrwertsteuer 20%: 130,00£
+ Gesamtbetrag:780,00£
"Lieferung: DAP Leverkusen innerhalb
14 Tagen nach Auftragseingang
Zahlungsbedingungen: Kasse bei Auftragserteilung
Bitte um Auftragsbestätigung
hoflicher Schluss
Sie (eigener Name) arbeiten im Einkauf
bei der Kraus Garteneinrichtung
GmbH, Theodor-
Heuss-Str. 400, 47167 Duisburg (E-Mail: vorname.nachname@kgg ger). Ihre Firma hat ein Angebot
über Gartenmöbel von der finnischen Firma Eko-Baltia Agency Oy, Amiraalintie 2, 86300 Oulainen,
Finnland, erhalten und möchte jetzt mehrere Artikel bestellen:
Nutzen Sie die Useful phrases (S. 116-117) und erteilen Sie der finnischen Firma einen Auftrag in Form
einer E-Mail oder eines Briefes unter Berücksichtigung folgender Punkte:
heutiges Datum
Referenzen bei Brief: Ihre Initialen + /TT
Ansprechpartnerin: Ms Noora Mäkelä, Exportleiterin (E-Mail: n.maekelae@ekb
fin)
Bezug auf Angebot von (datiert vor einer Woche)
Tisch „Natural“, Artikel-Nr. NT5o,
€, 10 Stück;
Stuhl Omni, Artikel-Nr.0C77, zu 50,00€, 60 Stück
abzgl.10% Mengenrabatt: 375,00€
zzgl.24% Mehrwertsteuer: 810,00€
Gesamtbetrag: 4,185.00€
Lieferung: DAP Duisburg, innerhalb 3 Wochen
nach Auftragserhalt
+ Verpackung
im Container
Zahlung: 10 Tage 2%, 30 Tage netto
Versand auf dem Straßenweg
Bitte um Auftragsbestätigung und Versandanzeige
héflicher Schluss
| SKILLS CHECKLIST |
Writing business letters
© Have | checked the layout of the
letter/email?
© Have used the Useful phrases?
9 Have
| checked my spelling
grammar?

--- Seite 76 ---
Orders
Many thanks for your offer dated
Having seen your offer on the internet and spoken to you
on the telephone,
We have seen your offer for... on the internet
Vielen Dank für Ihr Angebot vom
Nachdem wir Ihr Angebot im Internet gesehen und mit
Ihnen gesprochen haben,
Wir haben thr Angebot
über ...im Internet gesehen.
Insurance
Insurance will be arranged by us/you
Transport
Transport and insurance of the goods from... to...
will be arranged by us/you,
Commercial correspondence
Versicherung
Die Versicherung
wird von uns/Ihnen übernommen.
Versand
Versand und Versicherung
der Ware von... nach .. über
wird von uns/Ihnen übernommen.
On the basis of the terms stated in your offer dated
Aufgrund der in Ihrem Angebot vom „. Datum) aufgeführten
Packing
Verpackung
jedingungen
container
Container
We now wish to place an order / a further order / atrial
order for the following goods:
[Headings] Quantity / Description / Size / Article no.
We are pleased to note that you grant a quantity/trade/
introductory/special discount of
[Headings] Unit price
/ List price / Total
(80%) trade discount
(10%) quantity discount
Subtotal /Total price
20% VAT [value added tax]
30% in advance, 70% after completion
by transfer to our a/c at...
(name of bank)
by L/C (letter of credit)
by bank transfer
10 days 2%, 30 days net after receipt of invoice
Wir möchten einen (weiteren) Auftrag / einen Probeauftrag
über folgende Waren erteilen
[Überschriften] Menge
/ Beschreibung
/ Größe /
Artikel-Nr.
Wir freuen uns festzustellen, dass Sie einen Mengen-/
Händler-/Einführungs-/Sonderrabatt von ...% gewähren.
[Überschriften] Stückpreis / Listenpreis / Gesamt
Händlerrabatt 30%
Mengenrabatt 10%
Zwischensumme
/ Gesamtpreis
20% MwSt. [Umsatzsteuer/Mehrwertsteuer]
30% im Voraus, 70% bei Fertigstellung
per Überweisung auf unser Konto bei...
(Geldinstitut)
per Akkreditiv
per Banküberweisung
2% Skonto bei Zahlung innerhalb von 10 Tagen, netto bei
Zahlung innerhalb
von 30 Tagen nach Rechnungserhalt
in sturdy cartons /
on pallets
We look forward to receiving your advice of dispatch.
Please send us your confirmation of order and advice of
dispatch in the near future.
We trust the goods will arrive punctually and in good
condition
and will place further/regular orders if they sell well
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Use words from the list to translate the acknowledgements
checklist (1-9) into German.
in stabilen Kartons /
auf Paletten
Wir freuen uns auf den Erhalt Ihrer Versandanzeige.
Bitte schicken Sie uns Ihre Auftragsbestätigung und Versand-
anzeige
in den nächsten Tagen
Wir vertrauen darauf, dass die Ware pünktlich und in gutem
Zustand ankommt
und werden weitere/regelmäßige Aufträge erteilen, wenn
sie sich gut verkauft.
‘ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS CHECKLIST.
EI reference
to order
confirmation of order
offer of substitutes
‚Ablehnung des Auftrags - Angebot
von Ersatzware
rejection of order
Anlage(n)/Anhang/Anhange - Auftragsbestätigung
Bezug auf Auftrag + Bezug auf neue Produkte/Dienst-
terms of delivery and payment
leistungen + Bitte um Bestätigung « Datum und Art der
date and mode of delivery
Lieferung - höflicher Schluss + Liefer- und Zahlungs-
advice of dispatch
price(s) and discount(s)
Incoterms® rule (see page 203)
Incoterms®-Klausel (siehe Seite 203)
FOB Hamburg / CIP Dortmund Airport /
FOB Hamburg / CIP Flughafen Dortmund /
bedingungen - Preise und Nachlässe - Versandanzeige
request
for confirmation
DAP our premises
DAP unsere Geschäftsräume
EI reference
to new product(s)/services
Delivery date/period
Liefertermin/-zeit
L.) Geloemliys
1 enclosure(s)/attachment(s)
Delivery
is to be made within .. weeks
at the latest
Die Lieferung
muss innerhalb .. Wochen erfolgen.
within 10 days after receipt of order.
innerhalb
von 10 Tagen nach Auftragserhalt.
by 30 June 20. / by 30 June 20. at the latest
bis zum 30. Juni 20. /bis spätestens 30. Juni 20.
J- GF T BB BO A.

--- Seite 77 ---
‘OCUS ON BUSINESS .
BPG Trading GmbH in Dortmund has placed an order for 50 e-bikes with a French supplier and receives
an acknowledgement by email
Lesen Sie die E-Mail und beantworten Sie die anscl
:Benden Fragen stichwortartig auf Deutsch.
emma perry @bpgtrading ger
Subject: Your order no. EB/001 for GBFT-95
e-bikes and BFP-100 panniers dated 28 June
From:
_florian.leclerc@cycles-dufortfrg
Attachment(s): softride-100.pdf
Dear Ms Perry
Many thanks for the
above-mentioned order.
We are pleased to confirm the details as listed below:
Article:
e-bike
Articeno.:
Quantity:
Unit price:
Subtotal:
VAT20%:
Total price:
Packing:
sturdy cartons
Delivery:
within 48 hours after receipt
of order
‘As agreed, the goods will be delivered CIP Dortmund and our terms of payment are 10 days 2%, 30 days net.
We would also like to take this opportunity to draw your attention to our new range of Softride-100 unisex gel
saddles which are currently on offer. A PDF
on the new product is attached for your information.
if you have any queries about the new range of saddles, please do not hesitate to contact us.
Thank you for placing your order with Cycles Dufort SA
Yours sincerely
Florian Leclerc
Sales Director
Cycles Dufort S.A
200 Avenue Saint-Roch, 38000 Grenoble, France
Wann wurde der Auftrag über E-Bikes erteilt?
Wie viel Zeit hat die BPG Trading GmbH für die Zahlung?
Wohin wird die Ware geliefert?
Wie schnell kann geliefert werden?
Wie wird die Ware verpackt?
Warum ist eine PDF-Datei beigefügt?
aunaun-
a TM Bok,
Commercial correspondence
Gel saddles are now in demand, so BPG Trading GmbH places an order for 50 Softride-1005 at €50 each
with Cycles Dufort S.A. in Grenoble for delivery CIP Dortmund and receives the following answer.
emma perry@bpg-trading ger
Subject: Your order no. EB/002 for 50 Softride-100 unisex gel saddles dated 15 July
From:
—florian.leclerc@cycles-dufort-frg
Attachment(s): softride-200.pdf
Dear Ms Perry
Many thanks for the above-mentioned order.
Unfortunately, due to high demand, the Softride-100 saddles are currently
out of stock. Might we therefore
suggest substituting Softride-200s for the Softride-100s ordered?
The new model sells at almost the same price
and is very similar but lighter and comes in different colours. Please refer to the attached PDF for more details.
The list price of the Softride-200 saddle is €5750 but, under the circumstances, we are prepared to offer
€55.00 CIP Dortmund. Our terms of payment in this case would be 30 days net, and delivery can be made
within 48 hours after receipt of order.
Please let us know if you wish to accept this offer. If you have any queries about the new product, please do not
hesitate to contact us.
Yours sincerely
Florian Leclerc
Sales Director
Gycles Dufort S.A.
200 Avenue Saint-Roch, 38000 Grenoble, France
und beantworten
anschlieBenden Fragen stichwortartig auf Deutsch.
Welches Produkt hat die BPG Trading GmbH bestellt?
Warum kénnen die Sattel nicht geliefert werden?
Was schlägt der Lieferant vor?
Welche Konsequenzen hätte es für die BPG Trading GmbH, wenn sie den Vorschlag des
französischen Lieferanten akzeptiert?
© Replacement or substitute?
If an article is faulty, old, worn out, damaged,
broken or lost, a replacement is ordered
The replacement is identical to the old article.
If an article ordered is not available, for example
because it is out of stock
or no longer
manufactured, the supplier usually offers
a substitute. A substitute is similar
to the
CSREES
article ordered but not identical.
replacement
substitute

--- Seite 78 ---
E-Book - Unterrichtsmanager - Focus on Bu
Scenario support,
Sie (eigener Name) sind Leiter/in der Verkaufsabteilung der Firma Angelbedarf Lipinsky GmbH,
Rolandstraße 400, 50677 Köln (E-Mail: vorname.nachname@ ab-lipinsky
ger). Die Firma Hocking Ltd
(99 Dock Road, Birmingham BO2 4DD, Vereinigtes Königreich) hat bei Ihnen mit Auftrags-Nr. 47-FRD
Angelruten (fishing rods) bestellt
Nutzen Sie die Useful phrases (S. 121-122) und schreiben Sie eine Auftragsbestätigung in Form einer
E-Mail oder eines Briefes an die englische Firma unter Berücksichtigung folgender Punkte:
heutiges Datum
zuHd. Mr Sean Ashby, Einkauf (E-Mail: sean.ashby@hocking Itd.bxt)
+ Dank für Auftrag (Datum von vor ca.7 Tagen)
Artikel: Angelrute vom Typ Castaway
Artikel-Nr. FR2121
+ Menge:100
Stiickpreis:75,00€
Zwischensumme:7.500,00€
+ Mehrwertsteuer
Gesamtpreis: 8.925,00€
Lieferbedingungen: CPT Flughafen Birmingham
Zahlungsbedingungen: Kasse bei Auftragserteilung
Lieferung: innerhalb 8 Tagen nach Zahlungserhalt
Verpackung: 10 stabile Kartons
Bezug auf neue Angelrute vom Typ Flyfisher Premium und beigefügte Broschüre
Angebot für Flyfisher Premium auf Wunsch erhältlich
höflicher Schluss
Sie (eigener Name) sind Sachbearbeiter/in in der Verkaufsabteilung der BPG Trading GmbH,
Bayrische Straße 400, 44339 Dortmund (E-Mail: vorname.nachname@ bpg-trading.ger). Ihr Unterneh-
men erhält von der Firma Anyweather Camping Ltd (55 North Gate Bridge Road, Cork, T23 V2TO, Irland)
einen Auftrag über 200 Zelte (tents) vom Typ Outdoor X1, Stückpreis 25,00 €, CIF Cork
Nutzen Sie die Useful phrases (S. 121-122) und schreiben Sie eine Auftragsbestätigung in Form einer
E-Mail oder eines Briefes an die
irische Firma unter Berücksichtigung folgender Punkte:
heutiges Datum
zu Hd. Ms Megan O'Connor (E-Mail: megan.oconnor@awc-Itd irl) in der Einkaufsabteilung
+ Dank für Auftrag über Zelte von vor 7 Tagen
- Ware leider nicht vorrätig
- _ Vorschlag: Zelt Outdoor X2, Listenpreis 30,00€
Outdoor X2 ist stabiler und geräumiger als Vorgängermodell
+ _ Broschüre/PDF-Datei ist beigefügt
Ihr Angebot: 25,00€ pro Stück bei Lieferung FOB Hamburg oder 27,50€ pro Stück
bei Lieferung CIF Cork
Zahlungsbedingungen Kasse bei Auftragserteilung
Lieferung erfolgt innerhalb 14 Tagen nach Auftragseingang
Bitte um Mitteilung, welches Angebot angenommen wird
weitere Informationen können jederzeit zur Verfügung gestellt werden
ess .5th NRW
Acknowledgements
Many thanks for the above-mentioned order.
We are pleased to confirm the details as listed below:
Offer of substitutes
Due to high demand, .. (article) / the article(s) you require
is/are unfortunately out of stock at the moment.
Might we therefore suggest substituting ... (available
article[s]) for...
(not available article[s]}?
The new model sells at almost the same price and is very
similar but (is) lighter and comes in different colours.
Please refer to the enclosed/attached brochure/PDF for
more details.
The list price of this article is
Under the circumstances, we are prepared
to offer it at
(price / Incoterms® rule)
Alternatively, we can supply it at .. (price / Incoterms® rule),
Rejection of order
We are unfortunately unable to fill/complete
your order.
[Headings] Unit price / List price / Catalogue price
[Headings] Total/Subtotal / Total price
quantity discount
‘As agreed, the goods will be delivered FOB Cork.
Payment of 30% of the invoice amount is now due
Payment of the remaining
70% will then be due.
Our terms
of payment for an initial order are .. (e.g. CWO
cash with order)
Our terms of payment (in this case) are / would be 10 days
2%, 30 days net.
Commercial correspondence
Vielen Dank für den oben genannten Auftrag.
Wir bestätigen gern die Einzelheiten wie folgt.
‘Angebot von Ersatzware
‚Aufgrund starker Nachfrage ist/sind .. (Artike) / der von Ihnen
benötigte Artikel derzeit leider nicht vorrätig.
Dürfen wir deshalb vorschlagen...
(nicht verfügbare[n]
Artikel) durch ... (verfügbare[n] Artikel) zu ersetzen?
Das neue Modell wird zu fast dem gleichen Preis verkauft
und ist sehr ähnlich, (ist) jedoch leichter und in verschiede-
nen Farben erhältlich.
Weitere Einzelheiten können der beigefügten/angehängten
Broschüre/PDF-Datei entnommen werden.
Der Listenpreis dieses Artikels beträgt
Unter den Umständen sind wir bereit, ihn/es zum Preis von
(Preis / Incoterms®-Klausel) anzubieten.
Als Alternative können wir den Artikel zum Preis von ... (Preis /
Incoterms®-Klausel) anbieten.
‚Ablehnung des Auftrags
Leider können wir Ihren Auftrag nicht ausführen.
[Überschriften] Stückpreis / Listenpreis / Katalogpreis
[Überschriften] Gesamt / Zwischensumme / Gesamtpreis
Mengenrabatt
Wie vereinbart, wird die Ware FOB Cork geliefert.
30 % des Rechnungsbetrags sind jetzt fällig.
Die verbleibenden 70% des Rechnungsbetrags werden dann
fällig.
Unsere Zahlungsbedingungen für einen Erstauftrag lauten
(«.B.Kasse bei Auftragserteilung)
Unsere Zahlungsbedingungen (in diesem Fall) sind/wären 2%
Skonto bei Zahlung innerhalb von 10 Tagen, netto bei Zahlung
innerhalb von 30 Tagen.

--- Seite 79 ---
The goods will be delivered by...
date) at the latest.
We expect to complete
your order in approx. 14 days’ time
and will inform you as soon as the goods are ready.
The goods will be packed in a container.
We note that you will arrange for transport
and insurance
of the goods from ... to your premises.
Delivery will be made within 48 hours after receipt of order
/ by the end of the month.
after receipt of payment
Advice
of dispatch
As soon as the total invoice amount has been received,
the goods will be transported to the port of. (city) for
shipment
we will send you our advice of dispatch
Please let us know
if you wish to accept this offer.
which offer you prefer.
We would also like to take this opportunity to draw your
attention to
which is currently on offer.
A PDF/brochure on the new product is attached/enclosed
for your information.
If you have any queries about your order / the (new)
product,
If you wish to receive a quotation for our new... (product)
(please) do not hesitate to contact us.
Thank you for placing your order with ... (name
of company).
Die Ware wird bis spätestens ... (Datum) geliefert.
Wir rechnen mit der Fertigstellung Ihres Auftrags in ca.
14 Tagen und werden Sie benachrichtigen, sobald die Ware
fertigist
Die Ware wird in einem Container verpackt
Wir nehmen
zur Kenntnis, dass
Sie Versand und Ver
sicherung
der Ware von ... bis zu Ihren Geschäftsräumen
übernehmen.
Die Lieferung erfolgt innerhalb von 48 Stunden nach
Auftragserhalt / bis Ende des Monats.
nach Zahlungseingang
Versandanzeige
Sobald der volle Rechnungsbetrag eingegangen ist,
wird die Ware zum Hafen ... (Stadt)
zur Verladung
transportiert
werden wir Ihnen die Versandanzeige zuschicken.
Bitte lassen Sie uns wissen,
ob Sie dieses Angebot akzeptieren möchten.
welches Angebot Sie bevorzugen.
Bei dieser Gelegenheit möchten wir Ihre Aufmerksamkeit
auch auf...
lenken,
der/die/das derzeit im Angebot ist.
Zu ihrer Information ist ein PDF / eine Broschüre beigefügt/
angehängt.
Sollten Sie Fragen zu Ihrem Auftrag / zum (neuen) Produkt
haben,
Wenn Sie ein Angebot über unser neues ... (Produkt) erhalten
möchten,
zögern Sie (bitte) nicht, sich mit uns in Verbindung zu
setzen
Vielen Dank für Ihren Auftrag.
a TM Bok,
Commercial correspondence
You work in the Accounting Department at BPG Trading GmbH in Dortmund, where the company
language is English.
Your company places an order
for clothing with a new supplier in india and receives a commercial invoice.
Deshpande Fashion LLP
210 Muktaram Babu Street
Burrabazar
KOLKATA 700007 INDIA
BPG Trading GmbH
Bayrische Straße 400
44339 Dortmund
GERMANY
‘COMMERCIAL INVOICE NO.: 7721553
Purchase order: Contract 31053371
Dated: 22 July 20.
Client no.: 0132
ITEM
QUANTITY
DESCRIPTION
UNIT PRICE
TOTALPRICE
(uss)
(uss)
“Runway” men’s tracksuits
“Playtime” soccer shirts
Total 6,000.00
Six thousand United States dollars only
Terms of payment:
TT 100% in advance
Terms of delivery:
Packing:
Seaworthy packing
Country of origin:
India
Name of bank:
‘Account number:
India National Bank, Kolkata, India
Lesen Si
ie Handelsrechnung
und beantworten
Sie die folgenden Fragen.
Nennen Sie Verkäufer und Käufer.
Erklären Sie anhand der Zahlungsbedingungen, wie und wann die Ware bezahlt wird.
Erklären Sie anhand der Lieferbedingungen, wo und von wem die Ware abgeholt wird und
wer den Haupttransport bezahlt
4 Nennen Sie die Währung, in der gezahlt wird.

--- Seite 80 ---
ocus on Business
Mate
Planunge
Commercial correspondence
Scenario support, . 192
After placing several larger orders, BPG Trading GmbH deals with the Indian company on open account
Sie (eigener Name) arbeiten in der Finanzabteilung
der Baumarktkette
Y&K AG, WilsonstraBe
terms with monthly settlement. When Alina Unger in the Accounting Department checks last month's
250, 35392 Gladbeck (E-Mail: vorname.nachname@bmykag ger). Zu Ihren regulären Lieferanten gehört die
statement, she notices that there are some errors.
irische Firma Magee’s Electrical Supplies Ltd, 203 North Strand Road, Dublin 3, D03 HC96, Irland. Bei der
letzten Quartalsabrechnung hat sich eine Unstimmigkeit ergeben.
Nutzen Sie die Useful phrases (S. 125-126) und verfassen Sie ein Schreiben zur Quartalsabrechnung in Form
einer E-Mail oder eines Briefes unter Berücksichtigung folgender Punkte:
daljitsharma@deshpande-Ilpind
Datum: 04. April 20.
Subject: Statement no. 6/20EU
for June 20.
Ansprechpartnerin: Ms Fiona O'Reilly, Verkaufsabteilung
From:
—_alina.unger@bpg trading ger
Attachment(s): bpg-statement6_june.pdf
(E-Mail: fiona.oreilly@magees-electrical tl)
Bezug auf Abrechnung Nr. LOBM4s für das vergangene, am 31. März 20.. endende Quartal (quarter)
mit einem Saldo von 7.500,00
€ zugunsten des Lieferanten
Thank you for the above-mentioned statement showing a balance in your favour of US$ 5,250.00.
Abrechnung stimmt mit Ihren Aufzeichnungen nicht überein
Es wurden 15 Kompressoren (compressors) vom Typ FHP77 zu je 150,00
€ geliefert, aber 50 in
Rechnung gestellt
Lieferant hat demzufolge 5.250,00€ zu viel berechnet
Bitte um erneute Berechnung sowie eine hierauf basierende neue Abrechnung
Überweisung erfolgt nach Erhalt der neuen Abrechnung
We are returning your statement and would request you to amend and send it back to us for settlement.
höflicher Schluss
As soon as we have received your new statement,
we will remit the sum owing,
Dear Mr Sharma
It has now been checked against our records and found to be incorrect in the following points:
We took delivery of 100 men’s shirts at US$ 5.00 each but you have charged us for 50 shirts.
We took delivery of 50 men’s suits at US$ 50.00 each but you have charged us for 100 men’s suits.
You have therefore overcharged us by US$ 2,250.00.
Please do not hesitate to contact us should you have any queries.
Payment
Yours sincerely
Alina Unger
Accounting Department
Lesen Sie die E-Mail und suchen Sie die entsprechenden Ausdriicke auf Englisch.
Abrechnung
4 Aufzeichnungen
7 abandem
2 Saldo
berechnet
8 Begleichung
zulhren Gunsten
zu viel berechnet
9 überweisen
Beantworten Sie folgende Fragen stichwortartig auf Deutsch.
Welche Zahlungsbedingungen hat die BPG Trading GmbH beim indischen Lieferanten?
Welchen Betrag stellt der Lieferant der BPG Trading GmbH in Rechnung?
Warum beanstandet BPG Trading die Abrechnung?
Um wie viel hat sich der Lieferant verrechnet?
Was soll nun geschehen?
| PAYMENTS CHECKLIST |
Use words from the list to translate the checklist (1-5)intoGerman.
EI reference to invoice/statement
B payment
Anlage(n)/Anhang/Anhänge - Bezug
auf Rechnung/
EI reference
to discrepancies
‚Abrechnung + Bezug auf Unstimmigkeiten - höflicher Schluss
EI polite ending
Zahlung
Gi enclosure(s)/attachment(s)
Thank you for the above-mentioned invoice/statement
dated .../ for ... (month) / quarter ending 30 June 20.
showing a balance in your favour of $1,000.
Your invoice/statement has (now) been checked against our
(own) records
and found to be incorrect (in the following point(s)
We have transferred .. (amount)
to your account.
This is to inform you that we have settled your statement
no. 20EU dated...
(date) by transferring the sum of
€1,000.00 to your account.
We are pleased to advise you that we have paid your invoice
by transferring €1,000 to your account.
Having checked your statement against our (own) records
we must point out that
Vielen Dank für die oben genannte Rechnung/Abrechnung
mit Datum
vom ... / für den Monat ... (Monat)
/ das am
30. Juni 20. endende Quartal, die einen Saldo zu Ihren
Gunsten
von 1.000 $ aufweist.
Wir haben Ihre Rechnung/Abrechnung mit unseren
(eigenen) Aufzeichnungen verglichen
und mussten feststellen, dass
sie (in folgenden Punkten /
im folgenden Punkt) falsch berechnet wurde:
Wir haben ... (Betrag) auf Ihr Konto überwiesen.
Hiermit teilen wir Ihnen mit, dass wir Ihre Abrechnung
Nr. 20EU vom ... (Datum) durch Überweisung
der Summe
von 1.000,00 € auf Ihr Konto beglichen haben.
Wir freuen uns Ihnen mitzuteilen, dass
wir Ihre Rechnung durch
Überweisung
von 1.000,00 € auf Ihr Konto bezahlt haben.
Nachdem wir Ihre Abrechnung mit unseren (eigenen)
‚Aufzeichnungen verglichen haben, müssen wir darauf
hinweisen, dass
J- GF T BB BO A.
may >

--- Seite 81 ---
you have miscalculated the discount.
you have (therefore) overcharged /undercharged us by $100.
Sie den Preisnachlass falsch berechnet haben,
Sie uns (deshalb) 100,00 $ zu viel / zu wenig berechnet haben.
Commercial correspondence
BPG Trading uses the three standard reminders shown below.
items 3 and 9 of your statement have been incorrectly
die Posten 3 und 9 Ihrer Abrechnung falsch belastet
charged.
worden sind.
reminder
Dear Sir or Madam
We are (therefore) returning your invoice/statement
Wir schicken thnen (deshalb) Ihre Rechnung/Abrechnung
would request you to amend and send it back to us for
zurück und bitten Sie, diese zu korrigieren und uns zwecks
Invoice no...
for... (amount, eg. €7,250.00) dated... (date,e.g.18 May 20.)
settlement.
Zahlung wieder zuzusenden
It has most probably escaped your notice that payment of the above-mentioned
Please send us an amended statement.
Bitte schicken
Sie uns Ihre korrigierte Abrechnung.
vetoes
wee quem date
ge Tune 20.)
We look forward to receiving
the sum in question in the next few days.
‘As soon as we have received your amended/new statement,
Sobald wir hre korrigierte/neue Abrechnung erhalten haben,
we will remit the sum owing.
werden wir Ihnen die geschuldete Summe überweisen.
Second
‘Yours faithfully
reminder
Accounting Department
Please do not hesitate
to contact us should you have any
Bitte zögern Sie nicht, mit uns Kontakt aufzunehmen, wenn
o2 July 20.
queries.
Sie weitere Fragen haben.
Dear Mr/Mrs/Ms ... (name,
e.g. Mr Kray)
We look forward to receiving your corrected invoice/
Wir freuen
uns auf den Erhalt Ihrer korrigierten Rechnung/
Invoice no... for .. (amount,
eg. €7,250.00) dated ... (date,
eg. 18 May 20.)
statement
‚Abrechnung.
We are sorry to note that the above-mentioned invoice is still overdue despite
our letter/email
dated ... (date, e.g. 26 June
We would very much welcome an explanation as to why payment has not been made
but, whatever the case may be, we would urgently request you to pay without delay.
If payment has already been made, please disregard this letter/email.
Yours sincerely
For the next few weeks you will be working in the Accounting Department of BPG Trading GmbH in
Dortmund, where the company language is English. A colleague gives you an information sheet describing
company procedure if an invoice or a statement is not paid.
CONFIDENTIAL
Lesen Sie das Infoblatt unten und beantworten Sie folgende Fragen stichwortartig auf Deutsch.
Dear Mr/Mrs/Ms .. (name, e.g. Mr Kray)
Welche Zahlungsbedingungen eignen sich fiir neue oder unzuverlassige Kunden?
Final
Invoice no...
for ... (amount,
e.g. €7,250.00) dated ... (date, e.g.18 May
2 Welche Zahlungsbedingungen werden regelmäßigen und oder vertrauenswürdigen Kunden
demand
gewährt?
‘We refer to our two previous letters/emails, dated ... (date,e.g. 26 June 20.) and
... (date, e.g.
3 Wie unterscheidet
sich eine erste von einer letzten Mahnung?
02 July
20.), about above-mentioned invoice, which is still overdue.
As we have received neither an explanation nor a remittance, we are setting you a final
deadline for payment of 7 days. If payment is not made by ... (deadline, e.g.16 July 20.),
we will stop all further deliveries and take the necessary steps to recover the sum owing
Terms of payment
and reminders: information sheet
The terms of payment for new or unreliable customers are usually payment in advance, CWO (cash with
Prompt payment is all that is needed to settle this matter.
order) or letter
of credit, because in each case we, as the seller, can be sure of being paid.
Yours sincerely
Regular and/or trusted customers are given better terms, for example
+ _ open account terms with monthly or quarterly settlement
10 days 2%, 30 days net
30/60/90 days net
Yawith order, Ys on delivery, % within 30/60/90 days after delivery
ir German equivalents in box B.
In most cases,
a reminder is therefore sent to a regular and/or trusted customer. The first reminder is
a polite reference to the unpaid invoice and a request to pay soon. The second reminder is more forceful.
Itasks for an explanation and is an urgent request for payment. The third remainder, or final demand,
sets a deadline
and describes
the consequences of non-payment. tis normally addressed to
a senior
executive and marked ‘Confidential’
‘A amount - disregard + due - explanation
final deadline + necessary steps - notice
overdue - remittance - settle - urgently
without delay
B als gegenstandslos betrachten - Aufmerksamkeit
Betrag - dringend - Erklärung + fällig - letzte
Zahlungsfrist - notwendige Schritte - regeln
überfällig - Überweisung - unverzüglich
Jr oe TE Ho %&-

--- Seite 82 ---
| REMINDERS CHECKLIST |
reference to overdue invoice/statement
reference to previous reminder(s)
request for explanation
request for payment including deadline
consequences of non-payment
polite ending
enclosure(s)/attachment(s)
Use words from the list to translate the chec
(1-7) into German.
Anlage(n)/Anhang/Anhänge » Bezug auf
frühere Mahnung(en) - Bezug auf überfällige
Rechnung/Abrechnung - Bitte um eine Erklä-
rung - Bitte um Zahlung einschl. Fristsetzung
Folgen der Nichtzahlung - héflicher Schluss
Soo0o50o0o
Scenario support, S.193
Sie (eigener Name) arbeiten in der Finanzabteilung der Seifenhersteller Seifenmanufaktur
Gerhardt GmbH, Richthofener Str. 400, 40699 Erkrath (E-Mail: vorname.nachname@smgerhardt.ger).
Vor fünf Wochen hat Ihr Unternehmen der Westwood Ltd (47 Golf Road, Durham SR88 ISH, Vereinigtes
Königreich (E-Mail: purchasing@westwood-Itd.bxt) Parfiimerieartikel im Wert von 3.375,00 € geliefert.
Zahlungsbedingung war 30 Tage netto. Das Geld ist aber bei Ihrer Bank noch nicht eingetroffen
Nutzen Sie die Useful phrases (5.129) und schreiben Sie eine erste Mahnung in Form einer E-Mail
oder eines Briefes an die Westwood Ltd unter Berücksichtigung
folgender Punkte:
teraktion:
Geschäftskorrespondenz, 5.215
Bezug auf Rechnung Nr. BBS-82 über 3.375,00
€ vom ... (vor fünf Wochen)
héfliche Zahlungserinnerung
Beifiigung der Rechnungskopie über 3375,00€
Schlussformulierung, in der Sie die Hoffnung auf baldige Zahlung ausdrücken
In der o.a. Angelegenheit sind weitere
zwei Wochen verstrichen, ohne dass Sie etwas gehört
haben.
Schreiben Sie eine zweite Mahnung in Form einer E-Mail oder eines Briefes an die Westwood Ltd
unter Berücksichtigung folgender Punkte:
teraktion:
Geschäftskorre
- Ansprechpartner: Mr Bill Summers, Finanzabteilung (E-Mail: bill summers@westwood-Itd.bxt)
emeuter Bezug auf Rechnung Nr. BBS-82 über 3.375,00
€ vom ... (vor sieben Wochen)
Bitte um Erklärung des Zahlungsverzugs
dringende Bitte um unverzügliche Zahlung
emneute Beifügung der Rechnungskopie über 3.375,00 €
Schreiben bei bereits erfolgter Zahlung bitte ignorieren
Nun sind insgesamt zehn Wochen verstrichen, ohne dass die Westwood Ltd eine Zahlung
geleistet hat.
Schreiben Sie eine dritte und letzte Mahnung in Form einer E-Mail oder eines Briefes an Mrs Emily
Jackson (E-Mail: emilyjackson@westwood-Itd.bxt). Berücksichtigen Sie folgende Punkte:
Vermerk: Vertraulich
serien
Bezug auf die vorhergehenden zwei Mahnungen
Letzte Fristsetzung bis zum ... (in 14 Tagen)
bei Nichtzahlung Androhung entsprechender Schritte, um fälligen Betrag einzuziehen
+ emeute Beifügung der Rechnungskopie über 3.375,00 €
héflicher, aber unmissverständlicher Schluss
TeEo%
Reminders
It has most probably escaped your notice that payment
of the above-mentioned invoice
was due on ... (date).
We are sorry to note that our invoice for... /the above
mentioned invoice is now ... days/weeks overdue.
despite
our letter dated .. / our telephone
call on .. the
invoice is now 10 days overdue.
We wish to point out that our sales agreement provides
for payment within 30 days at the latest.
We refer to our two previous letters/emails (see enclosures/
attachments), dated ... and ... with regard
to the above-
mentioned invoice, which is still overdue.
‘As we have received neither an explanation nor
a remittance,
Why has our invoice not been paid?
We would therefore welcome an explanation as to
why payment is delayed
We must therefore request that you pay by 30 November
20. at the latest.
We must insist that the amount in question be remitted
without delay.
We are setting you a final deadline for payment of 7 days.
If payment
is not made by ... date), we will stop all further
deliveries and take the necessary steps to recover the sum
owing.
Should you fail to pay this invoice, we will have no choice
but to discontinue our business relationship with your
company.
We look forward to receiving
the sum in question in the
next few days
Prompt payment is all that is needed to settle this matter.
If payment has already been made, please disregard this.
letter/email
Commercial correspondence
Höchstwahrscheinlich ist es Ihrer Aufmerksamkeit entgan
gen, dass die oben genannte Rechnung am ... (Datum) zur
Zahlung fällig war.
Wir bedauern festzustellen, dass unsere Rechnung über ../ die
oben genannte Rechnung nun ... Tage/Wochen überfälligist
trotz unseres Schreibens
vom ... /Telefonats
am ... ist die
Rechnung nunmehr 10 Tage überfällig,
Wir möchten darauf hinweisen, dass unsere Verkaufsvereinba
rung eine Zahlung innerhalb von spätestens 30 Tagen vorsieht.
Wir beziehen uns auf unsere zwei vorhergehenden Briefe/
E-Mails (siehe Anlagen/Anhänge)
vom ... und ... bezüglich
der oben genannten Rechnung, die noch offensteht.
Da wir weder eine Erklärung noch eine Überweisung
erhalten haben,
Warum ist unsere Rechnung nicht bezahlt worden?
Wir würden deshalb eine Erklärung für den Zahlungsverzug
begrüßen.
Wir müssen Sie deshalb bitten, bis spätestens 30. November
20. zu zahlen.
Wir müssen darauf bestehen, dass der offen stehende Betrag
unverzüglich überwiesen wird.
Wir setzen Ihnen eine letzte Zahlungsfrist von 7 Tagen.
Solite die Zahlung bis. (Datum) nicht erfolgen, werden wir
alle weiteren Lieferungen einstellen und die notwendigen
Schritte unternehmen, um den fälligen Betrag
zu erhalten.
Wenn Sie es versäumen, unsere Rechnung
zu bezahlen,
werden wir keine andere Wahl haben, als unsere Geschäfts.
beziehungen zu Ihrem Unternehmen einzustellen.
Wir würden uns freuen, die offen stehende Summe in den
nächsten Tagen zu erhalten.
Diese Angelegenheit kann durch eine prompte Überweisung
Ihrerseits geregelt werden.
Solite die Zahlung bereits erfolgt sein, betrachten Sie dieses
Schreiben
/ diese E-Mail bitte als gegenstandslos.

--- Seite 83 ---
‘OCUS ON BUSINESS
Mate
Planunge
Commercial correspondence
Describing problems
You work in the Purchasing Department
at BPG Trading GmbH in Dortmund. Your company recently
received a consignment of barbecues from Lindberg AB in Sweden but is dissatisfied with the goods.
poor quality/service
not good
more polite than ‘bad’; can also
mean disappointing (enttäuschend)
substandard goods/service
not as good as normal
used to describe goods or services
that are not good enough
Heinrich Baumann, the Purchasing Director, writes the following complaint to Ms Eva Ohlin
a faulty light switch
describes
a minor problem | can probably be repaired
the Export Sales Director at the Swedish company.
a defective alarm
describes a major problem | probably cannot be repaired
needs to be replaced
Lesen Sie die Reklamation und beantworten Sie die anschließenden Fragen stichwortartig auf Deutsch.
The car was damaged in the accident. | partly but not totally broken | can probably be repaired
a broken mirror
no longer
in one piece
cannot be repaired and needs
to be replaced
The product/repair/service/
not good enough,
describes
the quality of
a product,
eva.ohlin@Ibabswe
explanation is unsatisfactory
unacceptable
service or action
lam dissatisfied with your work.
not pleased or happy with
describes
an emotion/feeling
Subject:
Our order no. VIT97 dated 26 June
20. for 200 Smoker charcoal barbecues
something
From:
 heinrichbaumann@bpg-trading.ger Attachment(s): photo! jpg, photo2jpg
Date:
27July 20.
Use seven of the eight words from the table above to complete the em:
Dear Ms Ohlin
used once.
Each word can only be
We have just taken delivery of the above-mentioned consignment. it was agreed that delivery was to be
made within 3 weeks
but the consignment arrived 10 days late.
‘On examining the barbecues, we also found that 20 of them were damaged. This is probably due tothe fact
FREE He Specks rere Decal] re ey
ia aed in GATE on
| am writing to inform you that we are ==! with the consignment of kitchen furniture and equipment
ordered on 25 April 20.
Please explain why our order was so poorly executed.
Some of the microwave ovens have =: on/off switches that don't always work. The glass in three of the wall
Whatever
the case may be, we must ask you to send us replacements for the damaged barbecues within
cupboards is ==? and needs
to be replaced. Ten of the electric cookers have «4 heating elements because
48 hours, as these goods are needed urgently. If they do not arrive here by 29 July 20.., we will have to obtain.
they do not warm up when switched on. They will also need to be replaced. Most of the equipment arrived
them elsewhere
dirty
as a result of == packing. One kitchen table was == in transit, probably due to rough handling and
ill need to be
repaired.
We feel sure you will appreciate that our future business relationship will depend on how this matter is
Debaheccchacoatd eel
dealt with and expect to hear from you in the very near future.
‘As our company is well known for the high quality of its products, am sure you will appreciate that we
cannot accept
==7 goods.
Yours sincerely
We look forward to your comments in the very near future.
Heinrich Baumann
Purchasing Director
BPG Trading GmbH
| COMPLAINTS CHECKLIST |
reference to order
reason for complaint
delay in delivery
Anlage(n)/Anhang/Anhange - Bezug auf Auftrag
unsatisfactory goods/services
Bitte um Ergreifung geeigneter Maßnahmen
request for explanation
Bitte um Erklärung + Folgen für Käufer und Verkäufer
request for suitable action
Grund für Beschwerde « höflicher Schluss - Lieferverzug
consequences for buyer and seller
unzufriedenstellende Waren/Dienstleistungen
polite ending
enclosure(s)/attachment(s)
Welche Lieferzeit wurde vereinbart?
2 Nach welchem Zeitraum kam die
Sendung an?
3 Warum fügt Herr Baumann von der BPG
Trading GmbH seiner E-Mail an den
schwedischen Lieferanten Fotos bei?
4 Mit welcher Regelung dieser Reklamation
wäre die BPG Trading GmbH zufrieden?
5 Was wird die BPG Trading GmbH machen,
wenn der Lieferant
die Angelegenheit
nicht zu ihrer Zufriedenheit regelt?
Use words from the list to translate the checklist (1-7) into
German.
Boooo
GMi-~y ©
J- GF T BB BO A.

--- Seite 84 ---
Scenario support, 5.193
Sie (eigener Name) sind Einkaufsleiter/in bei der Firma Möbel Schwenk KG, Hagenstraße 72,
45894 Gelsenkirchen (E-Mail: vorname.nachname@moebel-schwenk
ger). Vor einem Monat hatten Sie
mit Auftrag-Nr. WDR/107A 100 Kleiderschranke (wardrobes) vom Typ „Highlands“ bei der schottischen
Firma First Rate Furnishings (47 Carlisle Street, Edinburgh EH2 8DF, Großbritannien) bestellt. Die Ware
ist gestern eingetroffen und gibt Anlass zur Beanstandung.
Nutzen Sie die Useful phrases (S. 133-134) und verfassen Sie eine Beschwerde in Form einer E-Mail oder
eines Briefes an die britische Firma unter Berücksichtigung folgender Punkte:
heutiges Datum
Ansprechpartnerin: Ms Fiona McTavish, Exportleiterin (E-Mail: fiona.mctavish @frf.bxt)
Bezug auf Auftrag
Erhalt der Sendung bestätigen
Lieferung der Sendung mit 5 Tagen Verspätung
shellbraune Kleiderschranke sind stark beschädigt, offenbar wegen unzureichender
Verpackung (siehe Fotos)
50 Kleiderschranke sind dunkelbraun statt hellbraun laut Bestellung
Bitte um Erklärung für schlechte Ausführung des Auftrags
Bitte um Verständnis, dass Ihre Firma die 50 dunkelbraunen Kleiderschränke nur mit einem
Nachlass von 30% behalten kann
Bitte um umgehende Ersatzlieferung der beschädigten Kleiderschränke, weil sie dringend
benötigt werden
Bitte um unverzügliche Stellungnahme
zukünftige Geschäftsbeziehung hängt davon ab, wie Beschwerde geregelt wird
Sie arbeiten in der Einkaufsabteilung der Firma Rockbottom Jeans GmbH in Essen (Mecklen-
burgische Str. 27, 45128 Essen), die heute von der chinesischen Firma Shenzhen Fashion Factory (2 Yuan
Dun Dong Street, Shenzhen, China 518000) eine Sendung Jeansjacken erhalten hat, die Anlass zur
Beanstandung gibt.
Nutzen Sie die Useful phrases (S. 133-134) und verfassen
Sie für Ihre Einkaufsleiterin, Frau Mareike
Sperling (E-Mail: mareike.sperling @rb-jeans-essen.ger), eine Beschwerde in Form einer E-Mail oder
eines Briefes an die chinesische Firma unter Berücksichtigung folgender Punkte:
heutiges Datum
Ansprechpartnerin: Ms Juanjuan Wan, Exportleiterin (E-Mail: jw@shenzhen fashion chi)
Bezug auf Lieferung (Auftrag-Nr. 1I106/CH von vor 14 Tagen)
Inhalt bei Ankunft nass wegen mangelhafter Verpackung
Farbe und Qualität weichen erheblich von dem Muster ab (Fotos beigefügt)
Bitte um umgehenden Ersatz, da Jeansjacken dringend benötigt werden
ohne beträchtliche Ermäßigung keine Bereitschaft, die minderwertige Ware zu behalten
Fortsetzung der Geschäftsbeziehung von der Regelung der Beschwerde abhängig
| SKILLS CHECKLIST |
riting business letters
© Have | checked the layout of the letter/email?
5 Have | used the Useful phrases?
© Have | checked my spelling and grammar?
Complaints
We have just taken delivery of the above-mentioned
consignment/goods/articles.
The above-mentioned goods were ordered/delivered on
24 March 20.
4 July 20.. we placed
an order with you for...
(article[s]) /
the above-mentioned goods.
With reference to order no...
for. (goods) placed on
(date)
we regret to inform you that we are dissatisfied with
them.
Delay
in delivery
The above-mentioned goods were delivered to us today,
7 days later than expected
It was agreed that delivery was to be made within 3 weeks.
The goods are now 3 weeks overdue.
The goods we ordered on
1 June 20. have still not arrived.
The consignment arrived 10 days late.
Unsatisfactory goods/services
(On examining the goods, we found that they / some of
them
were imperfect / of inferior quality / sub-standard /
(badly) damaged.
This is probably/obviously due to the fact that the goods
were
poorly packed.
roughly handled in transit.
See enclosed/attached photograph).
Please let us know why the consignment was delayed.
We would welcome an explanation of the delay/damage.
Please explain why our order was so poorly executed.
Commercial correspondence
Wir haben soeben die oben erwähnte(n) Sendung/Waren/
Artikel erhalten.
Die oben genannten
Waren wurden am 24. März 20. bestellt
geliefert
‘Am 4. Juli 20. erteilten wir Ihnen einen Auftrag über
(Artikel / die oben erwähnten Waren.
Mit Bezug auf Auftrag Nr. .. vom ... (Datum) über
(Warefn])
müssen wir Ihnen leider mitteilen, dass wir damit
unzufrieden sind.
Lieferverzug
Die oben erwähnten Waren wurden uns heute 7 Tage nach
dem vereinbarten Termin geliefert.
Es wurde vereinbart, dass die Lieferung innerhalb von
3 Wochen erfolgen sollte
Die Waren sind nun 3 Wochen iiberfallig,
Die von uns am 1. Juni 20. bestellten Waren sind noch nicht
angekommen.
Die Sendung ist mit 10 Tagen Verspätung angekommen.
Unzufriedenstellende Waren/
stleistungen
Bei Prüfung der Waren stellten wir fest, dass sie / einige von
ihnen
fehlerhaft / von minderer Qualität / minderwertig
/ (stark)
beschädigt waren.
Dies ist höchstwahrscheinlich/offensichtlich darauf zurück-
zuführen,
dass die Waren ... wurden.
schlecht verpackt
auf dem Transport unsachgemäß behandelt
Siehe beigefügte Fotografie(n)
Bitte lassen Sie uns wissen, warum die Sendung verspätet
angekommen ist.
Wir würden eine Erklärung der Verzögerung / des Schadens.
begrüßen.
Bitte erklären Sie, weshalb unser Auftrag derart mangelhaft
ausgeführt wurde.

--- Seite 85 ---
Whatever the case may be
we need ... (artice[s]) urgently.
Please let us know immediately when we will be able to
take delivery ofthe goods,
We must (also/therefore) ask you to send us replacements
(for the damaged goods) by return / by...
(date) / within
(time) as these goods are needed urgently.
We would (also) point out that
You will appreciate that
we can only keep... (eg, the substandard items) ifthe price
is reduced by ...%.
we cannot sell these articles at the normal price.
we have no alternative but to request a complete refund.
If this deadline is not kept, we will be obliged to cancel this
andall future orders as
several customers are threatening to cancel their orders
and go elsewhere.
some of our customers have now cancelled their orders.
If they do not arrive here by...
(e.g. 30 September) we will
have to obtain them elsewhere
We look forward to receiving your comments on this matter
without delay.
We feel sure you will appreciate that
our future business relationship will depend on how this
matter is dealt with.
We trust you will attend to this matter without delay.
We expect
to hear from you in the very near future.
Wie dem auch sei
benötigen wir...
(Artikel) dringend.
Bitte teilen Sie uns sofort mit, wann wir mit der Lieferung
der Waren rechnen können.
Wir müssen Sie (auch/deshalb) bitten, umgehend
/ bis
(Datum) / innerhalb .
(Zeitspanne) Ersatz (für die beschadig
ten Waren) zu schicken, da die Waren dringend benötigt
werden
Wir möchten Sie (auch) darauf hinweisen, dass
Sie werden dafür Verständnis haben, dass
wir... (.B.die minderwertige Ware) nur behalten können,
wenn
der Preis um ...% reduziert wird.
wir diese Artikel nicht zum normalen Preis verkaufen können.
wir keine andere Wahl haben, als um vollständige Rück-
erstattung
zu bitten,
Wenn dieser Termin nicht eingehalten wird, sehen wir uns
genötigt, diesen und alle weiteren Aufträge zu stornieren, da
einige unserer Kunden drohen, ihre Bestellungen
stornieren und sich anderweitig einzudecken.
da einige unserer Kunden ihre Aufträge jetzt storniert
haben.
Wenn sie bis
...(z.B.30. September) nicht hier eintreffen,
werden wir sie woanders beziehen müssen.
[=] BUSINESS CORRESPONDENCE
EU atch the video and complete the statements
below with the correct answer.
Martin is giving tips about how to write
a private and business letters
b business letters and emails
private letters and emails
2 Anexclamation mark is = used in the
salutation of an email of letter.
a never
b sometimes
c always
3 When writing to an unknown person,
the correct salutation is
Dear Siror Madam
b Dear Sir, dear madam
Dear Sirs and Madams
4 After the salutation, the body of the letter
or email
a sometimes starts with a small letter
b sometimes starts with a capital letter
¢ always starts with a capital letter
Salutations = start with Dear.
a never
b always
c often
6 Ifyou don't know whether a woman is
married or not, it’s best to address her as
Miss
7. If the salutation is Dear Sir
or Madam,
the letter or email finishes with
a Yours faithfully
b Best wishes
Yours sincerely
8 Best wishes, Best regards and All the best
are used when writing
to people
a youdon't know
b you have regular contact with
¢ forthe first time
9. The correct phrase when dealing with a
complaint is: We sincerely apologize for
any == caused.
inconvenient
b convenience
inconvenience
[EI se information from the video to correct the body of the email below. There are ten mistakes.
Wir erwarten Ihre unverzügliche Stellungnahme
zu dieser
‚Angelegenheit.
Sie werden sicherlich
dafür Verständnis haben, dass
die Fortsetzung unserer Geschäftsbeziehung von der
Regelung dieser Angelegenheit abhängig ist.
Wir vertrauen darauf, dass Sie sich unverzüglich mit dieser
Angelegenheit befassen werden.
Wir erwarten, von Ihnen recht bald zu hören.
TeEo%
Judith Miles <judith.miles@go-faster-stickers.bxt>
Hartmut Bonrath, Managing Director <h.bonrath@auto-dietz gmbh.ger>
Subject: Order no. 2226 for 1,000 VFC stickers dated 26 June 20.
From: — tanjaschulz@auto-dietzgmbh.ger
Attachment(s):
Hi Mr Miles!
we received the above-mentioned order this morning but I'm afraid we aren't satisfied with the stickers.
They're sub-standard and therefore we can't sell them. This has caused our customers considerable convenience.
We look forward to receiving your comments on this matter without delay.
Yours faithfully
Tanja Schulz
Purchasing Department
Auto Dietz GmbH
QQ aa Du =

--- Seite 86 ---
4 FURTHER FOCUS
FOCUS ON WORDS
AMERICAN LETTER LAYOUT
Enquiries
There are a number
of differences between American
and British letter layouts, in particular
Cate
Rabati Peine
Se OTS ETIENEÄETNENTEEN
regards the order of the different parts of the letter and the punctuation,
cae aes |e oem
study the letter below carefully and compare it with the British letter layout on page 90
sample
‘Muster, Probe
to provide samples
List as many differences in the order of the different parts and the punctuation as you can.
terms pl
Bedingungen
terms of delivery and payment Liefer- und Zahlungs:
You should find at least five.
bedingungen
to recommend sb/sth to sb
‘idm jdn/etw empfehlen | N recommendation Empfehlung
request
Bitte, Wunsch, Anfrage
Vito request sth um etw bitten, etw anfragen
Kennedy Electrics Corp.
Shen
artice
Artikel
item; article no. Artikelnummer
TOT Fence ao
Sears
carriage
Fracht, Beförderung
contract of carriage Frachtvertrag
clearance
Freigabe, Abfertigun
export clearance
<> import clearance
(one free line)
delivery
Lieferung (von Waren)
delivery period; delivery zone
October 17,20.
destination
Zielort, Bestimmungsort | at the destination am Bestimmungsort
duties pl
Zölle, Abgaben
import duties Einfuhrabgaben
‘Ramer Oi Sterns ine
expense
Kosten
at sb’s expense auf ids Kosten
toinsure sth
etw versichern
N insurance Versicherung
tiie Rock AR 72205
letter of credit (L/C)
Akkreditiv
payment by letter
of credit Zahlung per Akkreditiv.
toload
laden, beladen
© to unload entladen, abladen
price
Preis
price list; basic price Grundpreis; unit price Stückpreis
Re: Your Inquiry of October 12,20. about TP2000 Wi-Fi Boosters
quantity
Menge
in large quantities in großen Mengen
Steuer
value added tax (VAT) Mehrwertsteuer (MwSt.)
Dear Mr. Jones:
Orders and acknowledge
replacement, substitute
Ersatz
Vito replace ersetzen
We were delighted
to receive the above-mentioned inquiry
to ship, to dispatch
versenden
N shipment Versand; advice of dispatch Versandanzeige
similar
ähnlich
Nsimilarity
and enclose our latest catalog for your information,
stock
(tager-)Bestand
out of stock nicht lieferbar, nicht auf Lager
Payment and reminders
sincerely,
balance
Saldo, Kontostand
tosettle a balance einen Saldo ausgleichen
Georgina Owen
to charge
(Preis usw) berechnen
to overcharge/undercharge sb jdm zu viel/wenig
berechnen
deadline
Frist
to keep a deadline eine Frist einhalten
Georgina Owen
to demand sth
etw fordern, etw (Ware
N demand Forderung, Nachfrage: final demand letzte
usw.) nachfragen
Mahnung; in high demand sehr gefragt
werdue überfäli
Enclosure: Catalog
invoice
Rechnung
commercial invoice Handelsrechnung
total, sum
Gesambetrag, Summe
subtotal Zwischensumme
Complaints
consignment
Sendung, Lieferung
= delivery
damaged
beschädigt
= broken kaputt, zerbrochen
delay
Verzögerung
Vito delay sth; to be delayed
change the letter on page 96 from a British to an American letter layout. Enclose a company
faulty
defekt, fehlerhaft
= defective
brochure with the letter.
torefund
(Geld) zurückerstatten
Nrefund Rückerstattung,
unsatisfactory
nicht zufriedenstellend
tobe dissatisfied unzufrieden sein
WoK <

--- Seite 87 ---
fil)
eyebrows
pupils
surprise
emotion, eg. attraction
People communicate in different ways, often without knowing it.
rapidly blinking
arms
‘Study the photos and think about the emotions that they show. Choose words from the list to say
how you think
the people look.
disapproval
afraid + aggressive + angry + confused + disgusted - embarrassed - excited - fascinated + happy
smile
interested - irritated - sad + shy - surprised - suspicious - unsure
happiness
fect apart
fendi
Facial
Coma:
hands open:
legs crossed:
unrelaxed
Yous Gece
ce ce you ae
People not only communicate with each other but also with automated systems. This is because
businesses cut costs by employing as few people as possible
Study the pictures then write down where you might find the following forms of interaction:
Read the text below and use the words from the list to label the photos opposite.
(Pern AbReaceacietins
9 Meet
aggression - anger + defensive + fear - negative - personal - pursed « relaxed « welcoming
NON-VERBAL COMMUNICATION
Experts agree
that spoken language makes up only a small percentage
of how we communicate. The rest is the
non-verbal messages we give with our body: body language. Non-verbal messages are hard to hide because
they are shown automatically on our face (facial expressions) and by how we hold our body (posture).
online shopping
smart warehouse
riverless delivery van
delivery by drone
How often do you use e-commerce? Discuss this with a partner.
Facial expressions
The face shows a very wide range of reactions through the lips, mouth, eyebrows and eyes. The eyes are
known as the ‘windows to the soul’ and our pupils dilate (become bigger) to show positive emotion, such as
attraction, and contract (become smaller) to show negative emotion, such as anger. How rapidly
we blink
can show a number
of emotions, including stress. When our lips are pursed (pressed together tightly) they
show disapproval or frustration. When they are parted to show the teeth, they can express happiness
With your partner, make a list of the advantages and disadvantages of e-commerce. Which list is longer?
Many companies use a communication system called IVR.
(smile) or aggression (snarl). We bite our lips when we feel fear.
Posture
How we hold our body and what we do with our hands, arms and legs also say a lot about how we are feeling,
Open hands show that we are relaxed, whereas crossed arms and legs often mean that we are defensive
and unrelaxed. Standing with our feet apart means we are friendly and welcoming. The space
we leave
How can callers explain what they want?
Why do businesses use IVR?
Listen to the podcast and answer the following questions.
What do the letters IVR stand for?
What role does a computer play in the system?
bet,
than
cece outze
es and
ters fs Krtwn) #2 ou personal space
ane varies from less
than ED em (partes
When did you last make a call that was answered by an IVR system? Describe what happened.
family) to 35 m or more (public speaking). This space may vary in different cultures.
Make a list of the advantages and disadvantages of IVR. Compare your list with a partner.

--- Seite 88 ---
You are going to do a work placement at an event agency called NOW Events Ltd in York, UK. You will be
working with Leon Soames in the Travel and Accommodation Department
Before you go to York, you study the company's website.
Mi office@now-eventsitäbrt
MW live chat
Advice
(4 7+ Planning
+ Logistics
+ Action
+ Feedback
We communicate
listen
+ your image
plan
+ your message
+ your success
Meet the team
Trending
1) EN|DE|
FR IT} ES
NOWeventsiro GEES GEE
Browse our gallery
conference
product launch
Events
Travel and
Finance
‘Manager
Accommo
dation
contact us
event production
legal
event logistics
privacy
event management
cookies
event online
sitemap
Communication at work
Match the words in the list below to the parts (1-8) of the NOW Events Ltd website.
drop-down menu - footer + heading - language options - link
to text - link
to video
navigation bar - scroll bar
Study the website with a partner and say what you should do if you want to...
find out about the company’s services.
5 see the company’s latest activities.
2 find out more about conferences.
6 contact the company.
3 _ see the German version of the web page.
7 get information on a team member.
4 move up and down the page.
‘A good telephone manner is an important skill in business communication. Today, Leon Soames in the
Travel and Accommodation Department is taking a number of phone calls.
Copy the table into your book and then listen to or read the two dialogues. Put ticks in the table to
show how often the polite words listed are used.
please
thanks
sorry
Can..?
Could
Would
call
call2
1: Taking and transferring a call
Leon: NOW Events, good morning. This is Leon Soames in Travel and Accommodation
speaking. How can Thelp?
Hannah: Good morning. It's Hannah Lennon from Commercially. I'd like to speak to someone
about arrangements for an event in Germany next year, please.
Leon:
Justa moment, madam. 1'll put you through to Ben Archer in Events.
Hannah:
Sorry, didn't catch the name. Could you repeat it for me, please?
Leon:
Certainly, madam. The name is Ben Archer.
Hannah:
Thanks.
Leon:
Putting you through now. Please hold the line.
Hannah:
Thanks.
Ben:
Events
Hannah: Good morning. Can I speak to Ben Archer, please?
Ben:
Speaking.
2: Leaving a message
Leon: NOW Events, good morning. This is Leon Soames in Travel and Accommodation
speaking. How can Ihelp?
Emma: Good morning. Can 1 speak to Sally Newman, please?
Leon:
Certainly, madam. Who's calling, please?
Emma:
It’s Emma Fielding from LitewriteqU Ltd.
Leon:
Sorry,1 didn't catch that. This is a bad line. Could you repeat your name and company,
please?
Emma: Yes of course, it's Emma Fielding from LitewriteqU Ltd.
Leon: Im afraid I didn’t catch the name of the company. Could you spell it for me, please?

--- Seite 89 ---
Emma:
Yes, certainly. It's L-I-T-E-W-R-I
and then the number 4 and then the letter U
Leon:
Thanks.I'll put you through. Please hold the line....
I'm sorry but Ms Newman is out of
the office today. Would you like to leave a message?
Emma:
Yes, please. Could you ask her to call me back as soon as possible, please?
Leon:
Yes, certainly. 'll pass your message on to her. Is there anything else I can do for you?
Emma: No, thanks very much.
Leon:
Thanks for calling. Bye.
Emma: Bye
Now read through the two dialogues again and find the following:
1a different way of saying ‘yes’ without using the word itself,
2 words that are used with ‘yes’ and ‘no’ to avoid one-word answers
‘Answering
the phone
KMN Metalltechnik. Good morning. This is
(full name) in...
(department) speaking.
How can | help?
What can | do for you?
Who's calling, please?
Saying who you are
This is Frank Schmidt from
It’s Frank calling.
Saying
why you're calling
Can | speak to... please?
/ Am | speaking
I'd like to speak
to .../someone about... please.
Id like to know ... (if/what/when, etc.)
Could you tell me when delivery will be?
Transferring
a call
Please hold the line.
Just a moment. I'll put you through.
He/She isn’t at his/her desk, I'm afraid. Would you like
to phone back later?
Could | have your number, please?
isin a meeting
is out of the office today / this week / until ... o'clock.
Reacting
to what you hear
That's great/marvellous!
‘Oh dear!
Oh really!
Certainly, sir/madam.
My number's 0049 1622089465.
# When giving a telephone number,
say each number separately, except
for double digits. 0316 32881 is ‘oh (or
zero) — three — one — six, three-two-
double-eight
- one’
Apologizing
I'm (very) sorry but
Im afraid | can't
Poor connection
I'm sorry, | didn't catch that /the name.
This is
a bad line.
Could you repeat/spell that, please?
Did you get that? / Could | just read that
back
to you?
Offering help
Can | take a message?
Is there anything else | can do for you?
/V'll do that.
I'l pass your message on to him/her.
We'll get back to you as soon as possible.
Finishing the call
Thanks for calling.
Nice talking to you.
Talk
to you soon.
Bye.
Goodbye.
Have a nice day.
Communication at work
Choose a suitable phrase from the list opposite for the following business phone calls.
Der Anrufer / Die Anruferin stellt sich am Telefon vor.
Die gewünschte Person ist momentan nicht am Platz.
Die gewünschte Person ist heute nicht im Haus.
Sie möchten mit jemandem iiber ... sprechen.
Sie fragen, ob Sie etwas ausrichten können.
Die Leitung ist schlecht.
Sie möchten, dass der Anrufer / die Anruferin etwas für Sie buchstabiert.
Sie werden die Nachricht weiterleiten.
esaunsaun-
Work with a partner and use words and phrases from the dialogues in exercise 2 and the list of
phrases opposite to make the telephone conversation below polite.
Ben Archer in Events receives a call from a German company.
Ben:
Yes?
Annika: Good morning,
it's Annika Hoffmann from
Anlagenbau Maier in Bremen, Germany. 1d like to
Ben: Who?
Annika: Annika Hoffmann from Anlagenbau Maier
Bremen, Germany.
Ben: What do you want?
Annika:
I'd like to speak to Jackie Bell, please.
Ben: Wait ... She's out.
® One-word questions or
answers, such as ‘Yes? or ‘Wait’
are considered rude and
unfriendly
in English.
| SKILLS CHECKLIST |
Annika: Oh dear, it's urgent.
Ben:
She's out.
Telephoning
Annika:
Could you tell her I called and ask her to call me back
@ ‘Have | listened to what the
as soon as possible, please?
other person says?
Ben:
OK. (Hangs up)
© Have | used polite phrases?
Listen to check your answers. Which version is better?
Partner A: Look here. Partner B: Look at File 7 on page 201.
Use the model dialogues and the list of phrases opposite to role-play the following telephone
conversation.
Partner
A / Sie (eigener Name) / Anlagenbau Maier, Bremen
Nehmen Sie den Anruf am Arbeitsplatz wie üblich entgegen
‚Antworten Sie höflich und setzen Sie das Gespräch auf Englisch fort.
Wegen der schlechten Leitung bekommen Sie leider nicht mit, was der Anrufer / die Anruferin sagt
Bitten Sie ihn/sie, es zu wiederholen.
Bitten Sie den Anrufer / die Anruferin zu warten, während Sie ihn/sie durchstellen. Frau Stadler
ist heute nicht im Haus. Möchte der Anrufer / die Anruferin eine Nachricht hinterlassen?
Fragen Sie, ob Sie sonst noch etwas für den Anrufer / die Anruferin tun können.
Schließen Sie das Gespräch höflich ab.

--- Seite 90 ---
FOCUS on Business.
Materialie
Planunge
Communication at work
NOW Events Ltd receives an email with a request for accommodation from an American women’s
soccer team. Copy
the order form below and complet
the relevant information.
Leon Soames in the Travel and Accommodation Department gives you an information sheet about the
different types of accommodation, facilities
and services that guests ask NOW Events Ltd to book for them,
You make
a vocabulary list of the most important terms.
Find the English equivalents in the text of the German words in the box.
Imensfhessmeiikkn
2 Halbpension
möblierte Wohnung
From:
jodie.reacher@brs.usa
Attachment(s):
3 Vollpension
9 Einrichtungen/Annehmlichkeiten
4 besondere Ernährungsbedürfnisse
 rollstuhlgerecht
5 Selbstverpflegung
1 Gebühr
¢ borebet
= Rechts
Ham writing to confirm that the Boston Red Stars women’s soccer team will require six double rooms, each
with
two single beds, in three serviced apartments in Manchester, UK from September 8-16, 20.
The apartments should each have broadband Wi-Fi and
a fully-equipped kitchen to enable
the players to
Hotel information sheet
Meals
next day.
Bea este Ded and breakfast
Should you require further information, please
do not hesitate
to call me on 001 541 754 301
Half board means breakfast
and an evening meal
Mpa eee
ook forward to receiving your confirmation,
All-inclusive normally means that there are no extra charges, e.g. for drinks, snacks or entertainment.
Sechs
Some guests have special dietary
requirements,
tarian or gluten-free
food.
Forest pat Ege
Jodie Reacher
self-catering means you cook your own meals.
Breskéast
Boston Red Stars
A continental breakfast is usually only coffee and bread rolls with butter and jam.
(Note: jam = Marmelade, eg. strawberry jam. English marmalade is Orangenmarmelade)
A full English breakfast is a large breakfast, usually with cereal (e.g. cornflakes, porridge, muesli),
Order form
cooked bacon, sausages and eggs, baked beans, toast, and tea or coffee
First name
Surname
Telephone no.
Email
Single rooms usually have a normal-size single bed. Some may have a queen-size (large) or a king-size
‘Accommodation
(very large) bed
Town/City
Country
Double rooms can have a double bed or twin beds (two single beds).
Arrival
Departure
A family room sleeps three or four people.
An en suite bathroom or en suite facilities means that the room has
a bathroom connected to it
hotel.
guest house D)
(with s shower andforbathtub)
apartment(s) D_
| serviced apartment(s) D (state number required)
serviced apartment means that you have a fully-furnished flat with a cleaner.
Room(s) (state total number required)
single
double
family
en-suite
Bed(s) (state number required per room)
car park / bar / restaurant
/ wellness centre / sauna / swimming pool / jacuzzi / gym / Wi-Fi, WLAN /
single O
quemnaize 0
ingame 0
disabled access
Bote mes ere oe
ur eae ee) eae
breakfast D
half board O
full board D
all-inclusive D
self-catering D
A guest house has fewer facilities than a hotel and many only offer bed and breakfast.
Payment
parking O
secure parking
airport shuttle DI | Wi-Fi CD)
laundry service O
The price (or rate) for a room is usually per person per night.
room service
Payment is normally by credit card.
if you book through an agency, there can be a booking
Sometimes
a deposit must be paid to reserve
a room.
vcemails
NOW Events Ltd also receives two voicemails with requests for accommodation. Listen
to the
voicemails and note down the relevant details.
J- GF T BB BO A.

--- Seite 91 ---
Communication at work
Scenario support, 5.194
Leon Soames möchte ein englisches Infoblatt über Detroit erstellen und bittet Sie, Fakten zu
Geschichte und Architektur der Stadt zusammenzutragen. Im Internet finden Sie einen interessanten
You are doing a work placement at NOW Events Ltd in York, UK. You are helping
Artikel in deutscher Sprache.
the Travel and A
Leon Soames In the Travel and Accommodation Department,
Fassen Sie die wichtigsten Punkte des Artikels unter den angegebenen Überschriften in englischer
Sprache zusammen.
People abandon bankrupt city
Life returns
Fascinating ruins
Detroit's most famous architect
5 fio
Leon Soames erhält einen Anruf von einer Zeitung, die mehrere Journalistinnen und Journalisten
zur Detroit Auto Show in die USA schicken will. Er bittet Sie, während des Gesprächs mitzuschreiben.
Übertragen Sie das Auftragsformular und hören Sie sich anschließend das Gespräch an.
Detroit - mehr als nur „Motor City
Tragen Sie dann die entsprechenden Angaben in das Formular ein.
verstehen,
Die Geschichte
kraft aus. Nicht umsonst füllt der sogenannte
Travel requirements
Von der bedeutendsten Industriestadt der Weit | Ruinpom- dle Schönheit und Paszination der
zur ersten US-Großstadt, die Insolvenz anmel-
Ruinen - ganze Bildbände...)
1 | Numberoftravellers
Surname
First name | 1)
en se nano an ann
Doch Detroit ist im Wandel, leerstehende Wol
henden Autometropole Detroit offiziell das
kenkratzer - wie es sie noch vor einigen Jahren
Geld aus. Die Stadt war pleite. Probleme wie
Arbeitslosigkeit, ein schlechtes Bildungssystem,
1" Downtown gab — wurden aufgekauft und
2 | Typeof
Flight DO
Train D
Coach O | Bus 0
Taxi OD
Hire car’ D
werden saniert. Die früher teils menschenleere
dert
eine hohe Kriminalitätsrate und ein nicht vor
Innenstadt ist nun belebt []
handenes öffentliches Transportsystem veran:
a mae
Seas
lassten immer mehr Menschen abzuwandern.
Die Architektur
Sie ließen Häuser, Möbel und Autos einfach
Der in Deutschland geborene Architekt Albert
zurück. Die Stadt verfiel, ganze Häuserzüge
Kahn prägte das Stadtbild von Detroit wie
Departure
Arrival
stop(s)
standen plötzlich - und stehen teils heute
kaum ein anderer. Einige der schönsten his-
noch — leer.
torischen Gebäude entsprangen seinen Ent.
würfen. Darunter seine erste Autofabrik - die
Packard Plant gilt heute als die größte verlas-
sene Fabrik der Welt...
Nur einige Beispiele fiir die vielen beeindru-
‘Accommodation
ckenden Gebäude in Detroit, die es auch heute
noch zu sehen gibt und auf deren Spuren man
Location
Check-in (date)
Check-out (date)
tagelang wandern könnte. Auch wenn sie teils
Accommodation
hotel O
guest house D
apartment D
durch jahrzehntelangen Verfall geprägt sind,
9 | Number ofrooms D
1 | single O | double C
family room
wie die Michigan Central Station, ein seit 1988
2 | single
double 0
family room O
leerstehender Bahnhof, der wie kaum ein an-
single D
double O
family room O
deres Gebäude den Aufstieg und Fall der Stadt
4 | single D_ | double O
family room 0)
visualisiert. Dass seit Ende 2015 der komplette
Facilities
| parking | airportshuttle 0
wii D | laundry service D
Bahnhof mit 1050 neuen Fenstern ausgestattet
other?
wurde,
ist sicherlich
ein gutes Zeichen
Meals
breakfast
halfboard
fullboard CO
alkindlusive DI
self-catering DI
(261 words)
12 | Special requirements?
Für unser Auge ist das schwer greifbar und
übt daher auf sehr viele eine hohe Anziehungs
E E © (ev

--- Seite 92 ---
Scenario support,
NOW Events Ltd veröffentlicht Reisetipps
für internationale Städtetouren auch in deutscher
Sprache. Sie werden gebeten, Wissenswertes über den Detroit People Mover (DPM) zusammenzustellen.
Lesen Sie das Informationsblatt zum Detroit People Mover und finden Sie heraus,
ob der DPM ober- oder unterirdisch verläuft
an welchen Tagen der DPM verkehrt
wie viele Haltestellen er anfährt
welche Haltestelle im Finanzviertel liegt
wie man vorgeht, wenn der Automat die Münzen nicht annimmt
+ _ obdie Bahn für Senioren und Menschen mit Behinderung gut zugänglich ist
- _ warum die Bahn nicht von Fahrgästen an Bord angehalten werden kann
was im Notfall zu tun ist
DETROIT PEOPLE MOVER
The Detroit People Mover is an elevated railtrans-
portation service which provides an affordable
and entertaining ride through Downtown Detroit
for both tourists and commuters. Sections of the
circular rail line operate 45 feet above street level,
offering travelers panoramic views of the city. In
addition, each station is home
to beautiful public
artworks, so even waiting
for the train is a pleasure.
Convenient and good value, the service runs seven
days
a week.
WHERE CAN | FIND
A DPM STATION?
All thirteen People Mover stations are marked on
our map. Some stops are located within major
buildings in the Downtown area with public access.
The remaining stations are at street level and are
marked by brightly-colored cross beams. Each station
is announced on board the train prior to arrival
Everyone is welcome aboard the DPM, so every
station is accessible to disabled and elderly persons
via elevators and escalators as well as stairs.
Stations integrated into buildings:
Grand Circus Park (Woodward & Park)
Cadillac Center (Broadway & Gratiot)
Greektown (Attached to Jack Greektown Casino)
Millender Center
Renaissance Center
Financial District (Larned & Shelby)
Cobo Center
Street level stations:
Michigan Avenue
Times Square (Grand River & Park Ave.)
Broadway (Broadway & Leon R.St.)
Bricktown (Beaubien & Fort St.)
Joe Louis Arena
Fort-Cass
Communication at work
HOW DOI USE THE DETROIT PEOPLE MOVER?
Pay the fare using coins ora token, which canbe | The People Mover is a fully-automated service.
purchased via machines in the fare gate area.
Doors close automatically and the vehicle cannot
‘Annual and monthly passes can also be purchased | be halted from on board the train. It is important
SAFETY INFORMATION
at DPM stations.
that passengers behave safely and sensibly at all
Operating
the fare gate:
times.
Step up to the gate
Stand behind the yellow caution line while
Place coins or token into the coin slot.
waiting
to board for the train.
Wait for the beep, then pass through the turn- | +
Do not wave hands or feet in front of the
stile. rou do not hear
a beep,
push the coin
doors.
return button and insert
the coins again.
+ Awarning
chime will sound before
the doors
Ifyou have purchased a pass, swipe it
close.
through the card reader
on the gate and
pass through the turnstile.
Proceed to the platform level
For emergency assistance, contact a Transit Officer
at any of the DPM stations or use the push-to-talk
devices
on board the train.
(412 words)
Scenario support, S.195
Sie sind für einige Tage in Detroit und wol-
len über die Stadt einen Blogartikel mit Fotos erstellen.
Um die Stadt zu erkunden, können Sie entweder ein
‚Auto oder ein Fahrrad mieten oder aber öffentliche
Verkehrsmittel benutzen.
Schreiben Sie einen Kommentar in englischer Sprache
über die Vor- und Nachteile motorisierter und
unmotorisierter
Transportmittel und begründen Sie
Ihre Wahl.
Scenario support,
NOW Events Ltd wird beauftragt, in Detroit ein geeignetes Hotel für die berühmte deutsche
Fotografin Hannah Prinz zu finden. Sie soll im Auftrag eines deutschen Magazins Fotos von verfallenen
Gebäuden (decaying buldings) in Detroit machen
Schreiben Sie mit Hilfe der Useful phrases (Seite 150) eine Anfrage an das Cadillac Grand Hotel Detroit
(2999 Tenth Street South, Detroit, MI 48226, United States, E-Mail: accommodations @cghg.det) unter
Berücksichtigung folgender Punkte:
heutiges Datum
Ihre E-Mail-Adresse: Vorname. Nachname@now-events-Itd.bxt
Adresse des Hotels vom Internetportal www.roomocity.usa erhalten
Bitte um Preisangebot für Zimmer mit Halbpension vom 10.-16. September 20.
+ Name des Gastes und Beschreibung Ihres Auftrags
Gast braucht ruhiges Nichtraucherzimmer mit eigenem Bad
vegetarische Küche erforderlich
Rechnung wird vor Ort mit Kreditkarte bezahlt
héflicher Schluss

--- Seite 93 ---
Booking accommodation
We have been given the address of your hotel by
(eg. the Tourist Information Office in London).
We found your hotel
on ... (website, e.g
www.roomocity.usa)
Quotation/reservation
Please send us a quotation for
Please reserve the following accommodation:
(bersonfs]) (will) require(s)
Rooms
/ number of beds
a/two/three single /double/en-suite/smoking/
non-smoking family room(s)
Meals
with breakfast / half board / full board
with an all-inclusive arrangement
Special requests
with vegetarian food
ina quiet location / near lift
Please make sure that the room has...
(e.g.a balcony/
bathtub).
Dates
arrival
on... departure
The booking is for one/two/three night(s) from
10-... March 20.
Payment
will pay by credit card on departure.
Please forward all bills to us for payment
All bills will be settled by each guest individually
(by credit card).
Polite ending
Do not hesitate
to contact us, should you require any
further information.
We look forward to receiving your offer/confirmation in the
near future / at your earliest convenience.
Wir haben die Adresse Ihres Hotels von...
(z.B. Fremden
verkehrsamt in London) erhalten.
Wir haben Ihr Hotel auf... (Webseite, z.B
www roomocity.usa) gesehen.
(Preis-JAngebot/Reservierung
Bitte schicken Sie uns ein Angebot über
Bitte reservieren Sie folgende Unterkunft
(Person/en) benötigt / benötigen
Zimmer
/ Anzahl der Betten
ein/zwei/drei Einzel-/Doppel-/Mehrbett-/Raucher-/
Nichtraucherzimmer mit eigenem Bad
Mahlzeiten
mit Frühstück / Halb-/Vollpension
Allinclusive
Besondere Wünsche
mit vegetarischer Küche
in ruhiger Lage / in der Nähe eines Aufzugs
Bitte sorgen Sie dafür, dass das Zimmer ... (.B.einen Balkon /
eine Badewanne) hat.
Termine
Ankunft am ..., Abreise am
Die Reservierung
gilt für eine Nacht / zwei/drei Nächte vom
10-... März 20.
Zahlung
wird bei Abreise per Kreditkarte zahlen.
Bitte schicken Sie uns alle Rechnungen zwecks Zahlung zu.
Alle Rechnungen werden von jedem Gast einzeln
(per Kreditkarte) bezahlt.
Höflicher Schluss
Für weitere Auskünfte stehen wir Ihnen gern zur Verfügung.
Wir wären Ihnen dankbar, wenn Sie uns Ihr Angebot / die
Reservierung zeitnah / so bald wie möglich zukommen
lassen könnten.
TeEo%
Communication at work
You are now helping Ben Archer, the Events Manager
at NOW Events Ltd
TS AND A
DINTMENTS
Ben receives an email from Chloe Backburn,
the Marketing Director
at SprinterMeal Ltd, a food delivery
company operating all over Europe.
ben.archer@now-events-Itd.bxt
Subject: Next annual sales convention
From: _ chloe.blackburn@sprintermeal.bxt
Attachment(s): softride-100.pdf
Dear Mr Archer
Following
our telephone conversation yesterday, |am now writing
to let you know our requirements for our
next annual sales convention.
Let me begin by saying that at last year’s 3-day convention in Donegal, organized by What's Up Events Ltd,
a number
of things went wrong,
as listed below:
Problems last year
Venue
venue
= beautiful
old castle in Donegal, Ireland;
but auditorium designed for banquets
not presentations
poor acoustics in auditorium for plenary sessions
+ _ video screen too small
to be seen easily by all
‘Accommodation
rooms in castle were poorly heated, it was winter
some delegates caught a cold and/or left early
Catering
novegetarian food
+ _uneaten
food was wasted, ie. thrown away and not given to charity
‘Transport
venue was 175 km from nearest airport (Belfast)
no train station in Donegal
coach journey from Belfast airport to venue took 3% hrs
2%hrs by car from Belfast airport
Extraactivities
only bar and restaurant
at venue
only ten-pin bowling, horse and greyhound racing nearby
Here are the main points to consider when choosing the next venue:
+ venue
in Ireland
+ _ modern, well-equipped
and easy
to reach
auditorium big enough for 125 attendees
beds for 100 delegates for three nights
Please bear in mind that SprinterMeal Ltd delivers top quality food to a very large market and our vision of a
healthy, sustainable lifestyle is our number one priority at all times. We expect high media coverage of this event
and must therefore present ourselves and our products in the best light.
We look forward to receiving your proposal for a suitable venue in the near future.
Please
do not hesitate
to contact me, should you require further information
Yours sincerely
Chloe Blackburn

--- Seite 94 ---
Read the email on page 151 and answer these questions.
Where is SprinterMeals next sales convention PONEYTTTTG
lace?
to take place:
Reading for understanding
ae was wrong with the auditorium last
Im Have | looked for kay wordsin the
‘Why did some delegates leave the convention
SEE?
shiny list youn?
3 Have | found the key words in the text?
5 Have | compared my answers with the
Why was the catering criticized last year?
Why was last year’s venue unsuitable with
regard to transport links?
What must the venue for the next convention be able to offer?
Why is SprinterMeal so concerned about the impression it will make at the next convention?
questions and the text?
Read the email again and find the English equivalents of these Germans expressions.
Tagung
spenden
2 Tagungsort
8 berücksichtigen
3 (Hör-)Saal
9 gut ausgestattet
4 Plenarsitzung
nachhaltig
5 Unterkunft
Medienberichterstattung
6 verschwendet
12 Vorschlag
Use some of your answers to exercise 2A to complete Ben Archer's email to his assistant.
jamie jones@now-events-Itd.bxt
Subject: SprinterMeal sales convention
From: — ben.archer@now-events-itd.bxt
Attachment(s):
HiJamie
I need you to help me find a suitable ==" for SprinterMeal’s big convention in Ireland next year. It has to have
an =? big enough for 125 delegates because they're planning to have a number of
3 with presentations,
videos and so on,
so it needs
to be very
=, ie. have all the latest audio-visual equipment. Most
of the
delegates
will also require me’ for three nights.
SprinterMeal is expecting
a lot of ==® from the major
TV and radio stations, so we need to communicate
their
image of a healthy, ss” lifestyle. That means, for example, that all uneaten food has to be given »=® and not
thrown away.
There are a lot of points to
9 before we send them our =s"®, so can you get back to me as soon as possible?
Thanks
Communication at work
Ben Archer phones Chloe Blackburn to arrange an appointment in London to discuss the next sales
convention.
Listen to or read the conversation and write down when and where they arrange to meet.
Chloe:
SprinterMeal Ltd. This is Chloe Blackburn speaking. How can
I help?
Ben:
Hello, it’s Ben Archer from NOW Events Ltd.
Chloe: Ah yes.1 wrote to you about our next sales convention. Thanks for calling.
Ben: My pleasure, Ms Blackburn. I think there's a lot to discuss, so would it be possible to meet
in London next week?
Chloe:
Yes, that’s a good idea. And please call me
Chloe.
Ben:
Thanks,andmy name’s Ben. could catch
an early morning train from York and be
in London by 10 am.
Chloe:
Great. Just let me look at my diary
So when would you like to come?
Ben: How about meeting on Monday,
27 February? Would you be available
at 11 0r 12 o'clock?
Chloe:
I'm afraid that won't work because I'm
attending a sales workshop then
Ben:
What about the afternoon?
Chloe:
That's also a bad time for me because the
workshop’s until 6 p.m. and I'm going to the opera in the evening
Ben:
The opera! Very nice! Which one are you going to?
Chloe:
Don Giovanni,
Ben: Tm sure you'll have a great evening!
Chloe:
Thanks. Now how long will we need for the meeting? An hour?
Ben:
More like two, would say. Will you have time on Tuesday afternoon?
Chloe:
I'm free at 4 o'clock for an hour but not for two.
Ben:
OK,so Monday and Tuesday are no good. What about Wednesday or Thursday?
Chloe:
I'm flying to Berlin on Tuesday night and coming back on Friday morning, I'm afraid.
Ben:
So that leaves us Friday. What time do you get back to London?
Chloe:
I'm arriving at Terminal ı at London Heathrow just after 11 am. and I'm flying to Majorca
that evening at 7 pm.
Ben:
OK, so how about meeting for lunch? I know a good place near Heathrow Airport. Are you
free at lunchtime or do you have another appointment?
Chloe:
No, I'm free then
Ben:
In that case, 'll meet you at the arrivals gate in Terminal 1. When does your flight get in?
Chloe:
At 1120.1t's flight number .. just let me check ... BAS67.
Ben:
Great! I'll be there at 11.30 and I'll have a sign with your name on it and then we'll go
forlunch
Chloe:
Excellent. See you on Friday.
Ben:
Yes, and I'm very much looking forward to meeting you. Bye for now.
Chloe:
Bye.

--- Seite 95 ---
Look at Chloe Blackburn's diary for the week beginning Monday 20 April below and write five more
sentences about her arrangements for that week.
resent
progressive,
At 8 a.m. on Monday she's attending a team meeting. At
Chloe Blackburn, SprinterMeal Ltd, London, UK
Monday
Tuesday
20 April
z1apı
20-26 April 20..
Attend team
Breakfast
meeting
meeting:
Mai Chiang
Sales team
FairFood
09.05 train
meeting
trade fair
to York
London
Give
all day
presentation
Interview
Meeting
candidates
with
for sales jobs
Tina Bell
[> eviews necting ENN
Lunch with
Working
Lunch with
Tina Bellat
lunch:
Dylan Shaw
Luigi's
Georgina
Interviews
Lunch
Meeting:
Fran Cotton
Interviews
write sales
report for
first quarter
Meet sales
Meeting:
director
Sean Riley
deadline for
sales report
for first
quarter
1912 train to
London
Theatre:
King Lear
Partner A: Use Chloe Blackburn's diary above.
I'm having lunch
Partner B: Look at Ben Archer's diary in File 3 on pages 198-199.
with Tina Bell.
‘Ask each other questions starting:
“What are you doing at ... (time) on... (day)?”
Chloe, what are you doing |—
‘Answer using the information in your diary.
at I p.m. on Tuesday?
Communication at work
Chloe Blackburn will be in York on Thursday 23 and Friday 24 April. She would like to arrange another
meeting there with Ben Archer.
Work with a partner.
Partner A: Use Chloe Blackburn's diary opposite.
Partner B: Look at Ben Archer's diary in File 3 on pages 198-199.
Role-play a dialogue in which Chloe Blackburn and Ben Archer find a suitable time for a 2-hour meeting
in York.
‘Suggesting a meeting
!d like to make an appointment at... (time) on...
(day).
What about having lunch / meeting at the airport / coming to my office?
Would it be possible to meet while you're here /in London?
Suggesting a time
How about meeting
at 2 p.m. /in the evening?
How long will it take / will we need?
It'll take about two/three hours.
How/What about 9.30 at the hotel reception / the airport?
Would you be available tomorrow morning/evening at eight?
Do you have time to meet later today / tomorrow?
Will you have time on Tuesday/Wednesday morning/afternoon/evening?
‘Are you free at... (time)?
Checking availability
Just let me look at my diary.
What time would that be?
I'm not sure. I'll check. /1'l get back to you.
Declining
I'm afraid that won't work because I'm giving a presentation / | already have another appointment.
I'm sorry, but Im busy then.
That's a bad time for me, I'm afraid.
How/What about 9,30 instead?
Accepting
Yes, I'm free then.
I've got nothing/something on this afternoon / that day / then.
Let's make it 2.30 p.m. That will give me a bit more time.
Finishing the conversation
I'll meet you at
/ I'l be at... (place) .. at (time).
Great! Thank you very much.
That's marvellous!
I really appreciate it.
We look forward to seeing you then.

--- Seite 96 ---
Sam Smith, Personal Assistant to Jackie Bell, Managing Director of NOW Events Ltd, sends out invitations
to a meeting
to discuss plans for SprinterMeal's next sales convention.
Read the invitation and find the English equivalents in the em of the German words (1-8).
Teilnehmer
5 Tagesordnungspunkte
2 geplant
6 (ab)ändern
stattfinden
verschicken
4 Tagesordnung
8 Anwesende
<participant_list>
Subject: SprinterMeal Ltd’s next sales convention
From:
sam.smith@now-events-itd.bxt
Attachment(s): draft_agendasMm.pdf
Dear participants
This is to inform you that the meeting to discuss SprinterMeal Ltd's next sales convention is scheduled to take
place at our head office in York on 15 July 20.
The draft agenda with a list of items is attached for your information. if you wish
to amend it, please let me know,
so can circulate the amended agenda to all attendees in good time.
I ook forward to seeing you at the meeting,
Best regards
‘Sam Smith attaches
the following draft agenda to his email.
NOW Events LTD, 250 Clarence Street, York YO31 7CW, UK
DRAFT AGENDA (SPRINTERMEAL SALES CONVENTION)
Date:
15 July 20.
Time:
10a.m.-1pm,
Room:
Large conference room
Chair:
Jackie Bell, Managing Director NOW Events Ltd
Attendees: Sam Smith, PA to Ms Bell, NOW Events Ltd
Chloe Blackburn, Marketing Director, SprinterMeal Ltd
Ben Archer, Events Manager, NOW Events Ltd
Leon Soames, Travel and Accommodation, NOW Events Ltd
Absentees:
Sally Flint, Finance Director, NOW Events Ltd
Minutes:
Sam Smith
Communication at work
Items
1 Dates
4 Catering
2 Venue
5 Transport
3 Accommodation
6 Extra activities
Any other business (AOB)
Read the agenda and answer the questions.
währe
How many people are expected to take part in the meeting?
2 Who will be unable to attend the meeting?
3 Who willchairthe meeting?
4 How longis the meeting expected to last?
5 Which agenda item is about
+ traveltoand
fromthe convention?
+ _ arrival and departure times and days?
hotel rooms?
the location?
food and drink?
other things to do at the convention?
6 When will it be possible to talk about something that is not included on the agenda?
Leon Soames in the Travel and Accommodation Department asks you to get some information on
hotels near the conference centre. You quickly make some notes in German.
Use your notes below to make two graphs showing a) the distance from the hotel to the conference centre,
and b) the price for three nights in a single room with breakfast. Use the diagrams to prepare a short
presentation about the hotels and make a recommendation.
Hotel
Standort
Größe und
Extras
3 Nächte
Ausstattung
im EZ mit
Frühstück
Clancy
= 5 Minuten vou Flughafen | - 100 Zimmer
~ kostenloser 24-Stunden- | 360,006
Airport
per Shuttle-Service
= Flachbild-TV
Shuttie-Service zum
Hotel
- 15 Autominuten vom
~ kostenfreies WLAN | Flughafen
4Sterne
Konferenzzentrum
- barrierefrei
- Frfnessraum
Riley lodge | -As Minuten vom Flughafen
|- 250 Zimmer
= Frfnessraum
Hotel
per Shuttle-Service
- Flachbild-TV
- whirlpool
SSterne | - 30 Aufominuren vom
- Klimaanlage
- Wellness
Konferenzzentrum
= kostenfreies WLAN | - kostenloser Shttic-
= Zimmerservice
Service zum Flughafen
- barrierefrei
Murphys | ~20 Minuten vom Flughafen | - 125 Zimmer
~ Parkplatz gegen Aufpreis | 300,00 €
Lodge
per Shuttle-Service
Flachbild-TV
- Shattle-Service zum
3Sterme | - 5 Autominuten vom
- barrierefrei
Flughafen gegen Aufpreis
Konferenzzentrum
Buckley
- 20 Autominuten vom
= 300 Zimmer
~ kostenloser Shuttle-Service | 340,00 €
Flughafen
= Flachbild-TV
zum Flughafen
4Sterne | -2 Minuten zu Fuß vom
~ Klimaanlage
~ Fitnessraum
Konferenzzentrum
~ kostenfreies WLAN
- barrierefrei

--- Seite 97 ---
Communication at work
The meeting to discuss SprinterMeal Ltd’s next sales convention takes place as planned. Sam Smith,
Heese 2; Accommodation:
the Managing Director's personal assistant, takes the minutes
Leon Soames suggested B&B
at the
4-star Clancy Hotel because itis two minutes
from the venue
and has 300 bedrooms.
Before listening to the recording, read the minutes of the meeting and note down the following
information:
Sich
wähn
esens
Notizen
machen, 5.21
Item 4: Catering
who was absent from the meeting
Leon Soames stated that the hospitality team at the DCC could provide breakfast, lunch, lunch bags
which country the conference is due to take place in
and a full dinner for a maximum of 140.
when the convention is due to take place
The food is from local suppliers to reduce food miles, and uneaten food is given to a charity.
4 how long the conference will last
Item 5: Transport
5 thename of the hotel
6 how many nights the delegates will stay at the hotel
Leon Soames reported that the venue can be easily reached by air, sea, car, taxi, rail, ram, bus and
7 which meal(s) the delegates will have at the hotel
bike,
8 what will happen to any uneaten food
what the delegates will be able to do in the breaks
Chloe Blackburn’s suggestion
Ben Archer added that the DCC offers active breaks for attendees, including Pilates, kung fu,
relaxation exercises and cycling tours.
Item 6: Extra activities
‘AOB
NOW Events LTD, 250 Clarence Street, York YO31 7CW, UK
Chloe Blackburn suggested inviting a celebrity
to open the convention (e.g. a famous model) to
MINUTES
maximize media coverage.
Meeting
on 15 July 20.
Chair.
Jackie Bell, Managing Director NOW Events Ltd
Jackie Bell, the CEO of NOW Events Ltd, checks
the minutes before they are sent out and finds some
Attendees:
Chloe Blackburn, Marketing Director, Sprinter Meal Ltd
mistakes. Listen to the recording and find the eight mistakes that her PA has made.
Sally Flint, Finance Director, NOW Events Ltd
während
Hörens
Notizen
machen,
Leon Soames, Travel and Accommodation, NOW Events Ltd
‘Sam Smith, PA to
Ms Bell, NOW Events Ltd
er cau USER Exam: Manager NOW ESN e
Use the notes to write an English agenda for another meeting
to discuss SprinterMeal’s sales convention
mutes:
Sam Smit
next year.
Jackie Bell opened the meeting and welcomed Ms Chloe Blackburn from SprinterMeal Ltd.
Ms Blackburn explained that SprinterMeal Ltd required a suitable venue in Scotland
for a two-day
= 30. Juli
convention with 125 delegates and accommodation for 100 delegates in May
or June next year.
- 03.00 - 11.00 Uhr
= Raum: kleiner Konferenzraum
Item 1: Dates
~ leitung: Ben Archer
= anwesend: Leon, Sally, Sam, Jamie:
= abwesend: Jackie
Arrival
Monday, 4 May 20.. (morning)
- Protokoll; Sam
Conference: Tuesday, 5 May - Wednesday, 6 May 20.
Ben Archer suggested the dates below for two full days for the convention ending with dinner on
the Wednesday evening,
Departure: Thursday,
7 May 20. (evening)
Tagesordnungspunkte
- Promi für Eröffnung der Tagung
Item 2: Venue
- Unterkunft
= Rel
Ben Archer suggested the O'Toole Hall at the Dublin Conference Centre (DCC).
travel expenses)
The hall has room for 530 people
as an auditorium and 140 for dinner.
Denn
There are also four meeting rooms next to it for 34, 35, 36 and 50 people.
~ Sonstiges
GMi-~y ©
J- GF T BB BO A.
WoK < ww

--- Seite 98 ---
Communication at work
The meeting takes place as planned on 30 July 20..and Ben Archer asks you to make notes on the meeting
and then compare them with Sam Smith's before the minutes are circulated.
You are doing a work placement at NOW Events Ltd in York, UK. You are helping
Ben Archer in the Events Department. NOW Events receives an enquiry from Lola Granger, Senior
Project Manager at Artcenter Inc, an American artists agency. The company wants to organize
a music festival in Ireland
Use your German notes to write an English version of the minutes.
Ben Archer eröffnet das Mecting.
70? 4: Promi für Eröffnung der Tagung
~ Laut Ben Archer können Damien Keane (Arsenal) oder Bill Hunter (Manchester United)
ES REESE
die Tagung eröffnen.
port,
In einer Sitzung mit Lola Granger geht es um das geplante Musikfestival in Irland. Ben Archer
2: Unterkunfi
(OP 2: Unterkunft.
bittet Sie, Protokoll zu führen.
- Damien keane braucht keine Unterkunft, denn er lebt im Sommer in Dublin,
aber Billy kunter
möchte eine Suite in einem Fünf-Sterne Hotel, weil er in Manchester lebt und seine Freundin,
_ Hören Sie der Besprechung zu und tragen Sie die jeweiligen Ergebnisse unter den entsprechenden
das berähmte Model Gisele Kloss, mitbringen würde.
Tagesordnungspunkten ein.
TOP 3: Reisekosten
~ Beide Promis wollen in einer Stretchlimousine (stretch-limo) zur Tagung gebracht werden.
NOW Events LTD, 250 Clarence Street, York YO31 7CW, UK
- Billy Hunter besteht auf Business-Class-Fläge für sich und Seine Freundin von Manchester nach
MINUTES
Dublin und zurück.
Meeting on 12 April 2
TOP 4: Gage
Chair: Ben Archer, Events Manager, NOW Events Ltd
= Laut Ben Archer verlangt Damien Keanes Manager cine hage von 50.000 & fr einen Vormittag
Attendees:
(drei Stunden) und 20.000 & für eine Stunde.
~ Billy Hunters Manager verlangt 50.000 & pro Stunde, denn Gisele Kloss wäre auch dabei.
Sonstiges
Absentees
Minutes:
Ben Archer opened the meeting and
Ms Granger explained that.
© Wie man ein englisches Protokoll schreibt
Item 1: Dates
Im Englischen wird ein Protokoll nicht nur in der Gegenwart verfasst, sondern kann auch in der
Vergangenheit oder der Zukunft erstellt werden. Im Allgemeinen erfolgt die Berichterstattung unter
Start:
‘Anwendung der Regeln der indirekten Rede (S. 232).
Finish:
Item
Es empfiehlt sich, mit einer Reihe von einleitenden Verben zu arbeiten, z.B. added
/ went on to say /
thought
/ it was agreed / suggested + ing / insisted on + ing.
enka
Eine Aussage kann auch mit according to eingeleitet werden. According to kann mit jeder Zeit verwendet
werden, z.B. According to Leon Soames, the hotel is / was / will be suitable.
Item 4: Catering
SKILLS CHECKLIST
Item 5: Transport
Writing the minutes of
a meeting
@ Have | included all the relevant information?
©] Have | checked my notes of the meeting carefully?
= Have I checked my grammar and spelling?
Sasi
Item 6: Extra activities

--- Seite 99 ---
ocus on Business
Scenario support, 5.196
Für die Festivalbesucher soll als Unterkunftsmöglichkeit „Glamping“ angeboten werden.
Sie möchten wissen, was Glamping eigentlich ist, und finden im Internet einen informativen Artikel
Fassen Sie die wichtigsten Punkte des Artikels unter den angegebenen Überschriften stichwortartig
auf Deutsch zusammen.
Bedeutung des Wortes „Glamping“
verschiedene Zelttypen
"grundsätzliche Unterschiede zwischen
typische Ausstattung
Glamping und Camping
Stromversorgung und Beleuchtung
‘“GLAMPING
Glamourous camping for beginners
For many, camping
is associated with hard work, dirt and a terrible
night's sleep. ‘Glamping,’ a hybrid of the words ‘glamorous’ and
‘camping’ offers something much more comfortable. At our campsite,
you can enjoy
a relaxing experience while still appreciating
beautiful natural surroundings. Leave the heavy equipment at home
if you decide
to camp with us, you'll arrive to a pre-erected tent
your choice. Instead
of the commonplace
A-frame tent we have more
spacious options such as bell tents,
tipis and yurts. We've even
replaced sleeping bags by futons and silk sheets. For special occasions
like weddings
and in-company team-building weekends, we also offer
a range of stronger structures including shepherd's huts and gypsy
wagons for even more comfort. We choose the location for each of
our accommodation options very carefully, making sure that tents are
belltent |
pitched on level ground or on a platform to guarantee a peaceful
night's sleep. Each tent has access
to its own picnic area with cutlery
and tableware, as well as a fire pit with a private supply of firewood.
Showers
and toilets are available nearby, along with toiletries, hair
dryers and hot towels.
Though we provide these services, we still value the simplicity of the
camping experience. We believe that when the stress of a typical
camping
trip is removed, our customers have more time to fully enjoy
the nature around them. This is also the reason why our campsite is
‘off the grid,’ meaning
that there is no electricity available to charge
electronic devices. Not having
a mobile phone helps our campers
fully ‘switch off” and take a break from their busy everyday lives.
At night
the campsite has
a completely different feeling, lit only by
torches and firelight. We respect the simple pleasures in life and we
encourage our campers to do the same during their stay with us.
(315 words)
GMi-~y ©
J- GF T BB BO A.
Communication at work
Event-Manager Ben Archer beruft eine Sitzung ein, um das Sicherheitskonzept des Festivals zu
besprechen, und bittet um Beiträge. Sie finden einen Artikel über Sicherheit bei Massenveranstaltungen
in deutscher Sprache im Internet.
Fassen Sie unter den angegebenen Überschriften die wichtigsten Punkte des Artikels in englischer
Sprache zusammen.
Safer spaces for particular
groups
+ Women's campsites
Rapid-response security teams
Wie schafft man mehr Sicherheit,
und wer schreitet schon vorbildlich voran?
1. Safe(r) Spaces
Safe(r) Spaces sind abgetrennte Bereiche, zu denen nur Menschen Zugang haben, die sich diskriminiert
fühlen oder Diskriminierung befürchten. Viele Festivalveranstalter öffnen diese Bereiche fiir Queers,
Transgender, Frauen, non-binäre und Menschen mit Behinderung. Diese sollen die Veranstaltung hier in
Ruhe und sicher genießen können - ganz und gar sorglos. Das Glastonbury Festival in Großbritannien,
hat 2016 erstmals den sogenannten „Sisterhood“-Bereich geöffnet - ein Safe Space auf dem Festival-
gelände. Die Teilnehmerinnen waren begeistert und sprachen von einmaligen Emotionen und Erfahrun-
gen in dem abgetrennten Bereich.
2. Frauen-Camping
Das Nova Rock Festival in Österreich bietet dieses Jahr (2019) erstmalig einen abgetrennten Campingplatz
nur für Frauen an. Dafür meldet Frau sich ganz einfach über die Webseite an. Die Idee ist, dass Frauen
sich im Camp nachts wie tagsüber sorglos aufhalten und frei entfalten können, denn immer mehr
Frauen melden,
dass sie das auf dem gemischten Campingplatz nicht tun.
3. Awareness-Teams
Immer mehr Festivals setzen auch auf Awareness-Teams. Das sind Sicherheits-Teams, die exklusiv dafür
da sind, einzuspringen und beizustehen, sobald sie etwas sehen, auf etwas hingewiesen werden oder
direkt um Hilfe gebeten werden. Um es potentiellen Opfern leichter zu machen, selbst um Hilfe zu bitten
und auf sich aufmerksam zu machen, gibt es ein Codewort. Auf dem Hurricane Festival fragt man zum
Beispiel ‚Wo geht's denn nach Panama?". Die Sicherheitsleute wissen dann sofort Bescheid und bringen
die betroffene Person ohne weitere Nachfragen direkt an einen sicheren Ort - zum Beispiel zu einem
Safe Space.
(250 words)
Source: wwweventbrite de/blog/sicherheit-auf-deinem-festival/
Sie sind im irischen Cork mit den Vorbereitungen fiir das Kelly Farm Music Festival beschaftigt.
Nun möchte Farmer Patrick Kelly interessierten Besuchern Zelte zum Kauf anbieten und bittet Sie um Ihre
Hilfe bei der Beschaffung. Sie notieren seine Wünsche auf Deutsch, recherchieren im Internet, rufen bei
einem geeigneten Lieferanten an und geben für Kelly eine Bestellung auf.

--- Seite 100 ---
Filter Vv
Verfassen Sie mithilfe Ihrer Notizen im Namen von Patrick Kelly einen Auftrag an einen britischen
[2] COMMUNICATION IN THE WORKPLACE
Lieferanten.
Gesch
Auftraggeber: Patrick Kelly, Eigentümer (owner), Kelly's Farm, Ballincollig, County Cork, Ireland,
E-Mail: pkelly@kellys_farm.irl
Ansprechpartnerin beim Lieferanten: Ms Julie Dexter, Export Sales Director, Fuller's Best Camping
Kit Ltd, 350 Commercial Road, Nottingham NO4 3FL, England, E-Mail: julie@fbck.bxt
"Datum: 15. Mai 20.
Referenzen bei Brief: PKTT
Bezug auf Angebot
im Internet und Telefonat.
Zweimannzelt (2-man tent) „Nature-2“, Artikel-Nr. N2-200, 100 Stück zu je 75,00€; Viermannzelt
„Nature-4“, Artikel-Nr. N4-400, 100 Stück zu je 125,00
€; Sechsmannzelt „Nature-6“, Artikel-Nr.
N6-600, 50 Stück zu
abzgl.10 % Mengenrabatt: 2.875,00€
zagl.20 % Mehrwertsteuer: 5.175,00€
«Gesamtbetrag: 31.050,00€
Lieferung: CIF Cork, innerhalb 14 Tagen nach Auftragserhalt
Zahlung: Kasse bei Auftragserhalt
Bitte um Auftragsbestätigung und Versandanzeige
höflicher Schluss
LE Before you watch the video, match the words in box A with their German translations in box B.
Scenario support, 5.197
Die letzten Vorbereitungen für das Kelly Farm Music Festival sind reibungslos verlaufen.
Ihr Vorgesetzter, Ben Archer, ist mit Ihrer Arbeit zufrieden und schenkt Ihnen als Dankeschön zwei
Eintrittskarten
Lesen Sie die unten angegebenen Informationen und schreiben Sie einen Blogartikel über die Art der
Unterkunft, die Sie a) mit einer Begleitperson, b) mit fünf Begleitpersonen bevorzugen würden.
Beschreiben Sie u.a. die Vor- und Nachteile des Campings und Glampings und begründen Sie
Ihre Wahl.
KELLY’S FARM MUSIC FESTIVAL PRICE LIST
Admission: €200
A libraries « transformed - to text + data
protection - issue - commonplace -
to waste « downside - to suffer + infor-
mation overload + social skills « doubt
B alltaglich - Bibliotheken « Datenschutz + Informations:
überflutung - Kehrseite - leiden - Problem - Nachricht
schreiben + Soziale Kompetenz + verschwenden +
verwandelt + Zweifel
El Nowreadthe statements below, then watch the video and complete them with the correct answer.
Inthe past, most people got the infor-
mation they were looking for from
a videos
b books
c museums
5_ Thanks to the internet, companies can give
employees = time for their private responsibilities.
a less
b more
CAMPING
2 Internet users pay for the information
6 Some employees are stressed because they
Own tent
3 nights (€)
Price per person (€)
they receive with
receive « information.
a money
b credit
c data
a toomuch
b toolittle
c nodigital
GLAMPING
3 Data protection is == problem for
7. Business relationships are now == personal.
Tent type
People
3 nights (€)
Price per person (€)
companies today.
a more
b less
c never
(frame
tent
nota
A-frame
tent
a nota
aminor
amajor
8 Digital communication has made work better
4 International
trade is now
b hard
Seer
a everyone
b somepeople
c noone
Bell tent
© more expensive
Write notes on the two questions asked in the video and then discuss them with a partner.
Yurt
Question 1: Are you happy to pay for your information, so you can get information 24/7 and
just
in time?
What do you think?
Question 2: New technologies are making communication at work faster and faster and there is
Tipi
no doubt that this is good for business but is it good for us? What do you think?

--- Seite 101 ---
5 FURTHER FOCUS
Preventing digital overload must become part
of employee well-being programmes
Digital technology, in particular
the smartphone,
has transformed the way
we do business
and conduct
our social lives. This has opened up the opportunity for flexible working, but with it a culture has
developed where employees increasingly feel the need to be available around the clock
Twenty-four hours a day we are bombarded with endless interruptions through emails, texts, alerts and
instant messaging. For many, it is far too easy to be reactive, wasting
time on relatively useless tasks
and interactions, remaining busy but not productive. Research released this year found that millions of
people are now seeking a break from their technology. The majority of us admit to being “hooked” on
our smartphones, with one-third saying they have difficulty disconnecting at all
There is even an official term for this behaviour. The Collins Dictionary defines "nomophobia” as “a state
of stress caused by having no access or being unable to use one’s mobile phone’.
So how can companies provide support and guidarice in how to better manage digital technology usage
in order to Safeguard the well-being and work-life balance of their staff so they can perform to their best
and build resilience?
One route would be to follow France, where the government has introduced a new “right to disconnect
to ban workers from sending or replying to emails outside of working hours.
Starting to use technology in a more mindful way is the first step. The following are a few tips to give
employees about how to achieve this:
1 Leave your phone at the bedroom door
Leaving your phone off while you get up, dressed and eat breakfast makes for a better start to the day.
2 Turn off notifications and use “flight mode”
Turn the default notifications off. Make use of “flight mode” and stop texts and calls coming through.
3 Use good old-fashioned pen and paper
Carry a small notepad and pen with you and every time you want
to look something up online, resist the
temptation to do it there and then. Use your list to go online only a few times a day.
4 Be mindful and reclaim the pause in your day
Resist the temptation to automatically reach for your phone every time you have a free moment.
Read a book, look out of the window, or just close your eyes and breathe.
(400 words)
Source: This article by Anna Kotwinski of Shine Online was originally published in Occupational Health &
Wellbeing magazine, 01 February, 2017. Occupational Health & Wellbeing is published by DVV Media.
El Find German expressions
in the list for the
highlighted
words in the text.
achtsam - atmen - bleiben - führen + Kein-Mobiltelefon-Angst - Orientierungshilfe schützen + suchen +
süchtig - Unterbrechungen - Verhalten - verhindern - veröffentlicht - verschwenden - Versuchung -
verwandelt « Widerstandsfähigkeit - widerstehen « zugeben « zurückgewinnen
ER write down the amount of time you spend on digital media (smartphone, tablet, laptop, desktop)
every day, and how often you check your phone every day.
Compare your notes with a partner and discuss whether
you need to change your behaviour or not.
FOCUS ON WORDS
Body language
confused
defensive
embarrassed
facial expression
imitated
posture
personal space
munication
Digital
behaviour
interaction
interruption
to transform sth
Communicating on the phone
connection
to hold
the line
to leave a message
to put sb through
Travel arrangements
‘accommodation
to arrange
arrival
booking
deposit
accessible
double bed
room with en-suite facilities
full board
to pay by card
rate
single bed
surcharge
Meetings
absent
agenda
to agree on sth
conference
to schedule sth
to suggest sth
to take minutes
to take place
verwirrt
abwehrend
verlegen, beschämt
Gesichtsausdruck
gereizt, genervt
Körperhaltung
persönliche Distanzzone,
Intimsphäre
Verhalten
Austausch, Zusammenspiel,
Kommunikation
Unterbrechung
etw (grundlegend) verändern
Verbindung
am Apparat bleiben
eine Nachricht hinterlassen
jdn durchstellen, jdn verbinden
Unterkunft
(Termin) vereinbaren;
(Reise) planen, organisieren
Ankunft
Buchung, Reservierung
Anzahlung
zugänglich, barrierefrei
Doppelbett
Zimmer mit eigenem Bad
Vollpension
per Kreditkarte bezahlen
Preis
Einzelbett
Aufpreis, Zuschlag
abwesend
Tagesordnung
sich auf etw einigen
Konferenz
etw planen, etw festlegen
etw vorschlagen
Protokoll führen
stattfinden
N confusion
Vito defend oneself sich verteidigen
! ADJ embarrassing peinlich
to make/pull a face ein Gesicht ziehen (ugs,)
=annoyed
to have good/bad posture
to respect sb personal space
Vito behave
ADJ interactive
Vto interact with sb
Vito interrupt sb/sth
Ntransformation
poor connection; V to connect
to put sb on hold jdn in die Warteschleife stellen
<> to take a message etw ausrichten
vgl.to transfer a call
to find accommodation
N to make arrangements planen, organisieren
<> departure Abreise, Abfahrt
booking fee Buchungsgebühr
to pay a deposit
to have disabled access barrierefrei sein
queen-size bed, king-size bed
<> shared bathroom Gemeinschaftsbad
half board Halbpension, self-catering Selbst
verpflegung
<> to pay in cash bar bezahlen
room rate Zimmerpreis
twin beds zwei Einzelbetten; double bed Doppelbett
to apply/impose a surcharge
<> in attendance anwesend; N absentee <> attendee
! hidden agenda = Hintergedanke(n)
to come to an agreement übereinkommen
Vito hold a conference; vgl. convention Tagung,
Treffen
N schedule; to make a schedule
N suitability
! minute
= Minute
= to occur, to happen geschehen

--- Seite 102 ---
E-Book - Unterrichtsmanager - Focus on Bu:
forgotten password
bad driving
bus/train is late
The line is
engaged,
please
hold
to 50 Mb as standard
waiting on the phone
poor
or no reception
misleading advertising
your idea(s)
Study the pictures and note down which three make you angriest. Give examples.
‘Compare your answers with a partner and discuss why you agree or disagree.
Listen to a radio reporter asking people in the street what makes them angry and list the situ
mentioned.
Do the things on the list also make you angry? Discuss the list with a partner.
Now discuss with your partner which of the problems above can happen at work and write three or
four sentences about the possible consequences.
If the coffee maker at work is out of order, everybody in the office is annoyed / in a bad mood.
IF a bad driver makes you angry on your way to work, ..
People react differently in conflict situations.
‘Match the illustrations opposite with the captions in the list below.
aggression - bullying + sexual harassment
Write a few sentences to describe what is happening in each one.
Talk to a partner about when and how to seek help in a conflict situation at school/college or
at work.
ess .5th NRW
Reasons given by cyberbullies for attacking their victims
They're annoying
They deserve it (37%)
They bullied my friends (30%)
They bullied me
Sexual orientation (22
| was jealous (22%)
HERE m bored (11%)
for fun (15%)
our:
Statista
Here are 10 tips for victims of cyberbullying.
Don't reply: Replying can make the problem worse.
Collect evidence: Save screenshots and emails.
Block the cyberbully: Change your contact details only share them with friends.
Report the cyberbully to the provider: Some websites can block the cyberbully and delete posts.
Tell other people: Don't suffer alone. Get support from people you trust.
Get expert help: Family members often overreact, but a counsellor can help you get your
confidence back
7 Any contact with the cyberbully should
be via a mediator, not your parents: A well-informed
outsider can mediate better than overemotional parents.
8 Tell your school/college:
Talk to teachers about what to do.
9. Tell the police in extreme cases: Spreading lies about people, and insulting and humiliating
them online is illegal. Consider legal action.
10 Don't just stop using your phone and/or the internet: Others will still see the posts even if you
don't, and it won't help to cut yourself off from friends and family.
Study the graph above and do the following tasks:
Identify the most and least frequently given reasons for cyberbullying
2 Work out the percentage of cases for which no concrete reason is given for bullying someone.
Study the tips and then discuss with a partner what advice you would give the girl in the photo above.
Work in a small group and make a poster showing what to do at your school if someone is the vi
of cyberbullying. Include the names of the people to contact. Put the posters on the wall of your
classroom and discuss them in class.

--- Seite 103 ---
ocus on Business
You are getting work experience at a large furniture retailing chain called DIY Homemaker Ltd with its
headquarters in Dublin, Ireland. You attend an in-service training workshop about how to deal with
everyday problems
with colleagues.
The workshop leader gives you a handout with a diagram,
Nobody wants conflict at work but it's part of life and can be dealt with if you follow some simple
guidelines. Above all, conflicts must be acknowledged. If they are ignored, they will grow and break out
sooner or later, perhaps when its too late. Show respect to your colleagues by speaking less and listening
more. Don't tell people what to do. Instead, ask them what they want to do. Give praise whenever possible.
Apologize if you have done something wrong, Follow the six steps below in a conflict situation.
Follow these six steps to solving conflicts in the workplace:
‘sk the other person
Focus on facts, noton people.
to suggest a good time and
—> + Say There isa problem because...”
place to talk.
+ Don't say You always...”
Identify the problem.
+ Find out where you agree
and disagree.
Listen to the other person.
<— + Letthem talk.
+ Don't interrupt them.
Discuss
the future.
‘Agree on a solution.
Ls + Don'tconcentrate on problems © >
+ Ortrytofind a date to meet
in the past.
again.
Step 1: If you give the other person the freedom to choose when and where to meet to discuss the
problem, you show your goodwill because they will see that you are willing to change your plans to
find a solution. You will produce
a bad feeling in the other person if you are only willing
to meet when
and where you choose.
Step 2: You’ statements, such as“You never listen’ or ‘You don't help, are very dangerous because they
stress that the other person is the problem. To find a solution, focus on facts not personalities. Say ‘The
goods went to the wrong address’ and not ‘You sent the goods to the wrong address’
Step 3: Listening is a skill. You may think you already know everything, but perhaps the other person
knows something you don't. Listen carefully, give the other person time and don't interrupt. Ask
questions at the end to make sure you have understood and then summarize what the other person
has said.
Step 4: First summarize the points where you agree and check with the other person. Now summarize
the points where you disagree and modify your summary until you both agree on the areas of conflict.
Dealing with conflicts at work
Step 5: Try not to focus on the past. Look forward and develop a plan of action for each area of conflict.
Step 6: Agree a date to meet again and review the progress of the solution(s) you both suggested. At
the next meeting, congratulate each other when you see that progress has been made, no matter how
small. If necessary, continue or modify your plan(s) of action and meet again.
(425 words)
Lesen Sie den Text und beantworten Sie folgende Fragen stichwortartig auf Deutsch.
Was sollte man bei einem Konflikt am Arbeitsplatz als Erstes tun?
Wie kann man zeigen, dass man seinen Kolleginnen und Kollegen Respekt entgegenbringt?
Wie sollte man reagieren, wenn die andere Partei einen Termin für ein Treffen vorschlägt,
der einem nicht passt?
Worauf sollte man sich bei der Suche nach einer Lösung konzentrieren und worauf nicht?
Wie kann man sicher sein, dass man das Problem tatsächlich verstanden hat?
Wie ermittelt man die Streitpunkte?
Wie geht man mit den ermittelten Streitpunkten um?
Warum sollte man sich erneut treffen?
Während Ihres Praktikums bleiben Sie mit Ihrer Schulklasse in Kontakt. Berichten Sie nun Ihrer Klasse
über die sechsschrittige Problemlösungsmethode, die Sie im Seminar gelernt haben.
Fassen Sie die wichtigsten Punkte des Handouts in deutscher ETWEgTTTITTEE
Sprache zusammen. Achten Sie insbesondere auf folgende a
Punkte:
Have | read the situation?
+ wann man bei einem Konflikt am besten handelt
© Have understood who the
die Rolle des Zuhérens
mediation
is for?
die zu befolgenden Schritte
© Have | written the right sort of text?
The trainer then plays a dialogue between two colleagues, Jake and Boris, who are writing an important
report together. Jake is worried because the deadline is next Friday and there is still a lot to do,
First read through the following statements, then listen to the dialogue and write down if they are
true or false. Correct the false statements.
Jake chose a good time to talk about the problem.
Jake only talked about the problem.
Jake interrupted Boris
They identified the problem.
Jake talked about the past.
They agreed to meet again the next day.
aunsun-
Did Jake and Boris follow the six steps? Discuss with a partner how they talked to each other.
Then discuss in class.

--- Seite 104 ---
Dealing with conflicts at work
Work with a partner and role-play the dialogue between Jake and Boris again. This time they follow
the six steps and find a solution. Use the language box to help you.
Partner
Jake
Partner
artner As Jake
artner B: Boris
As part of your work experience
at DIY Homemaker Ltd in Dublin, Ireland,
Fragen Sie Boris, wann Sie sich treffen
Ly Schlagen Sie ein Treffen morgen um 10 Uhr
you are working with Claire O'Connor in the Customer Service Department.
können, um den Bericht zu besprechen
vor.
Stimmen Sie Boris’ Vorschlag
Einen Tag später
Sagen Sie, dass der Bericht immer noch nicht
Erklären Sie, dass Ihr/e Partner/in zu Hause
fertig ist, und Sie sich wegen des Termins
krank im Bett liegt, also haben Sie drei Tage
(deadline) Sorgen machen.
später angefangen und sind öfters früher
nach Hause gegangen.
Zeigen Sie Verständnis
für Boris’ Problem.
Fragen Sie, wie Sie helfen können.
> Danken Sie Jake, aber inzwischen haben Sie
Hilfe zu Hause (Mutter). Sagen Sie, dass Sie
jetzt Überstunden machen können.
Danken Sie Boris und schlagen Sie ein Treffen <1]
am kommenden Mittwoch vor.
nod 5
>? Stimmen Sie Jakes Vorschlag zu.
Claire O'Connor bittet Sie mitzuschreiben, während sie einen Anruf entgegennimmt, und gibt
| LANGUAGE HELP |
Ihnen hierfür
einen Vordruck,
There's something
Id like to talk
to you about.
(When) Can we talk about
..? When is a good time to talk about
How about 2 p.m. on Thursday?
/ Are you free at ... (time)
on ... (day)?
Yes, that's fine. / Yes, I'm free then. / Im busy then, but I'm free at .. (time).
Übertragen Sie den Vordruck unten. Hören Sie sich das Telefongespräch an und tragen Sie die
entsprechenden Angaben ein.
örverstehen,
I'm worried about ... /I'm not happy about... /I'm finding
it hard to...
because
Telephone message
I see what you mean.
/1 understand
Can I help in any way? /Is there anything | can do to help?
Date
(today’s date)
Thanks for your offer. / That's very kind of you.
Caller (full name)
Can we talk about it again tomorrow / next week?
Category (tick V)
trade O
private
Address
Email
‘Amy/Alex,
an English-speaking student, is working in your office at DIY Homemaker for three months.
Order no.
After some time, your colleagues start to complain, so your boss asks you to talk
to him/her.
Order date
Reason for calling
Order
Offer
Delivery
Payment
Complaint
Choose one of the complaints below and improvise a role-play between yourself and Amy/Alex to
discuss the problem. Use the six steps diagram to find a solution.
Details (eg. article, article
+ When the printer runs out of paper,
the student leaves it and doesn’t tell anybody.
no, delivery, extras)
- The student often opens the window or turns the heating up or down without asking first
Response
The student often talks too loudly on his/her mobile in English.
Importance
For information only
Low priority
High priority
Huati
tick Y
Think of a situation in your own life in which there was a conflict, for example at school/work or
tie)
youth/sports club. Role-play the situation with your partner and use the six steps to find a solution.
aaRran=-

--- Seite 105 ---
Dealing with conflicts at work
Claire O'Connor (claire.oconnor@diyhm-Itd irl) bittet Sie, eine E-Mail in ihrem Namen an
Say thank you
Herrn Murray zu formulieren.
Gratitude is memorable, and it can remind your customers why they shopped at your store or hired
your company. Regardless of the type of business you have, saying thank you after every transaction is
Schreiben Sie die E-Mail und berücksichtigen Sie folgende Punkte:
one of the easiest ways to start a habit of good customer service.
Bezug: Artikel Woodpecker garden playhouse;
‚Artikel-Nr. WPGP/2294; Auftrags-Nr. GBGJ/96 vom ... (heute vor einem Monat)
4 Train your staff
«Entschuldigung für Verspätung
Ike kmpoctan toimakesureailof
jour
CUSTOMER SERVICE
Grund: Fahrer musste wegen Autobahnunfall umkehren; Autobahn war sechs Stunden
employees, not just your customer service
Neuer Liefertermin: morgen Vormittag
should talk to, interact with, and problem-solve
Montage: morgen Nachmittag
for customers. Provide employee training that
Angesichts der Unannehmlichkeiten 10% Rabatt auf nächsten Auftrag
gives your staff the tools they need to carry
department,
+ Emeute Entschuldigung wegen äußerer Umstände
good customer service through the entire
Auftrag wird bevorzugt bearbeitet
Customer experience
IT’S EVERYONE’S JOB
Versicherung, dass Ware rechtzeitig für Geburtstagsfeier bereitsteht
héflicher Schluss
5 show respect
Customer service can often involve emotions, so it's important to make sure you and any other
colleagues handling customer service tasks are always courteous and respectful Never
let your own
Scenario support, 5.167
‘emotions overtake your desire to see your customer walk away happy.
Ihr Unternehmen möchte qualitätssichernde Maßnahmen durchführen. Alle Mitarbeiter
erhalten eine Broschüre über den korrekten Umgang mit Kunden
6 Listen
Listening
f the
lest
Fassen Sie die wichtigsten Punkte der Abschnitte
1-9 unter den angegebenen Überschriften
tomer service. Listening means hearing what
auf Deutsch zusammen.
Rezeption:
Leseverstehen,
your customers are saying out loud, as well as
Produkte/Dienstleistungen Ihres Unternehmens gut kennen
what they are communicating non-verbally.
Freundlich, höflich und aufmerksam sein
Watch for signs that they are displeased, while
Personal schulen
listening
to what they say to you directly.
Zuhören und Körpersprache
Von Anfang an Sympathie und Verständnis
für den Kunden zeigen
7 Beresponsive
+ Um Feedback bitten
There may be nothing worse than non-responsiveness for
a customer
who is trying
to get help, resolve
Auf Feedback reagieren
an issue, or find out more about
what you sell. It’s important to respond quickly to all inquiries, even if
it is only to say you are looking into the issue and will be back in touch. Some response is always better
than none, so the customer doesn't feel ignored.
Know your product
or service
forf
In order
to provide good customer
service, you need to know what you're selling, inside and out. Make
You may be surprised what you learn about your customers and their needs when you ask them what
all of
your
customer
facing staff — know hi
products
or services
work. Be aware of
Sea eee ences
eich aaa
they think of your business, products, and services. You can use customer surveys, feedback forms and
the most common questions customers ask and know how
to give them answers that will leave them
questionnaires, but you can also make it a common practice to ask customers first-hand for feedback
satisfied
when they are completing their orders.
2 Befriendly
9 Use feedback you receive
As they say, customer service starts with a smile. When you are in a face-to-face situation, a warm
You need to do something with the feedback you receive from customers in order to make it useful in
reeting should be the first thing your customers
see and hear when they ask for help. And even when
your customer service process. Take time to regularly review feedback, identify areas for improvement,
handling customer service requests
via telephone, a smile can come through in your voice, so make
and make specific changes in your business.
sure you're ready to
be friendh
yto be
(491 words)
© 7-8 T#EBo%-
WK < my >|

--- Seite 106 ---
Dealing with conflicts at work
Scenario support, $197
ICh 2
Claire O'Connor aus der Kundendienstabteilung
glaubt, dass Konkurrenten Online-Bewertungen
‘Auf der Suche nach gefälschten Online-Bewertungen finden Sie eine für ein Gartenhäuschen
falschen, und beruft eine Abteilungssitzung ein. Sie recherchieren im Internet und finden einen interessan-
auf der Homepage eines Konkurrenten. Nach kurzer Recherche stoßen Sie auf weitere, auffallend ähnlich
ten Artikel auf Deutsch.
formulierte Bewertungen.
Fassen Sie die wichtigsten Punkte des Artikels unter den angegebenen Überschriften in englischer Sprache
‚Schreiben Sie eine E-Mail an Claire O’Connor aus der Kundendienstabteilung, in der Sie die Echtheit
zusammen, um am Gespräch teilnehmen zu können.
Mediation,
der Bewertungen beurteilen und Stellung zu Sinn und Unsinn solcher Produktbewertungen
nehmen.
n:Rollenbasier
gnahme,
Exaggerated language including spelling mistakes?
+ Toomany customer reviews?
Similar names?
Really only a link to another site?
Keine Macht den Fakes!
Woran man falsche Bewertungen erkennt
G R E E N F | N
Tipp
1: Übertriebene Formulierungen
Tipp 3: Der Bewertende
Wooden Garden Shed
Die Bewertung klingt wie eine Werbeanzeige?
Der Name des Bewertenden kann ebenfalls
[.] Jeder Satz zeichnet die Dienstleistung oder
einen Hinweis bereithalten. Folgen in mehreren
Jpeg icon
das Unternehmen als phänomenal, gigantisch,
auffallend positiven Bewertungen Namen wie
pale hee
wundervoll aus? Wenn einen die letzte Frisur
„Mäuschen3o17“ oder „Hans605“ aufeinander,
wirklich begeistert hat [...), kann man schon mal
könnte dies ein Schema darstellen. Es muss nicht
ins Schwärmen geraten. Wird es aber zu positiv,
immer der Vor-und Nachname genannt werden,
sollte man auf jeden Fall weitere Bewertungen
aber manchmal lohnt es sich, genauer hinzu-
william49 one month ago
lesen, um ein objektives Bild zu bekommen.
schauen.
This is the best shed I've ever seen! Everything
about it is perfec and my wife and children
Rechtschreibfehler sind übrigens nicht unbe-
Tipp 4:
Eigenwerbung mit Hinweis auf Produkt
fave tara putikugmyeifin one hour
dingt ein Hinweis auf Echtheit, denn diese
der eigenen Firma
ea en ort oii
ttle
kauften
Bewertı
werden mittlerweile
bei gekauften Bewertun-
Manchmal bewerten Nutzer nur, um einen Link
naybours’ sheds were blown away but my new
gen auch oftmals eingebaut, um die Authen-
shed was still
as good as new when the rain
auf eine externe Webseite zu platzieren oder
tizität zu erhöhen.
stopped. My naybours are all going to by
a shed
Werbung für ein Konkurrenzprodukt zu ver-
Rene non
Tipp 2: Anzahl der Bewertungen
breiten. [..]
Schauen Sie sich an, wie viele Bewertungen ein
Hinweis: Lesen Sie, wenn möglich, gute und
Unternehmen bzw. eine Dienstleistung bereits
schlechte Bewertungen und schauen Sie sich
bekommen hat. Überlegen Sie anschließend, ob
auch mal älteres Feedback an. Es ist immer
will48 3 months ago
die Anzahl zu der Art des Unternehmens passt.
ratsam, das Gesamtbild als Entscheidungs-
Wenn ein kleines Autohaus oder ein eher dörf-
grundlage zunehmen.
(250 words)
It has lots of room and it only took me 45 minutes
licher Friseur knapp 20.000 Bewertungen hat,
to put up in my garden by myseif. The wood is
dürfte das ein Anzeichen dafür sein, dass hier
Source: Expert Systems AG/ProvenExpert.com
fabulous,
the roof
is 100% waterproof and the
nachgeholfen wurde.
dore and window open and close perfectly and
are very strong. Last week thieves broke into all
the garden sheds in our street but couldn't
brake into mine because it’s so well made!

--- Seite 107 ---
DEALING WITH COMPLAINTS
Watch the video and complete the statements
below with the words you see and hear.
1 Weseethe world from our own
GREATER LEVELS OF
OUR THINKING RIGHT DOWN
4. put ourselves in the = of the other person
talk about negative
6 don't
7 don’t = you have the best solution
El Read the statements below then watch the video and complete the sentences with the correct answer.
Patience is important because other
4 The two parties to a complaint should
people
a helpeach other to find a solution
a are often wrong
b each suggest one solution
b are often slow
© be prepared to win or lose
(Cain Coes)
5 When handling complaints, you should
2 When making or dealing with complaints
a stop the other person from talking
we need to see things from
for too long
a the other person's perspective
b ask questions and then listen
b  ourown perspective
¢ listen and then ask questions
eu employers pop
6 When handling complaints, you should
3 When making a complaint emotion
a explain whois to blame
can play
b show understanding for the other
a no part
person's problem
b asmall part
tell the other person what the best
the biggest part
solution is
Use the words from the list to complete the case study below. Make any necessary changes.
assume » dealing + emotional + excuses + interrupt + issue + patience perspective + range + satisfactory
Iwas new tothe job of with complaints and | got a shock when the first person on the phone
started shouting, screaming and getting really _ about a broken TV. I let him talk and talk because
I knew it was bestnotto
3 him. | tried to understand the problem from his
+ but unfortunately,
he Sthat would just give him his money back, which was wrong. Instead, l offered hima of
different options but he said none of them was 7and started shouting again. Luckily, | didn't lose
8.1 told him that | understood all the negative impacts of the _ but he wouldn't accept that.
He told me Iwas just making
_*, said he would complain to my supervisor about me and slammed
the phone down
EU Have you had any experience of making or dealing with a complaint? Write notes on something that has
happened to you (or to someone you know) then discuss the issue with a partner. Explain why you (or the
other person) were satisfied or dissatisfied with the outcome.
The text below
is taken from brochure published by the Federal Anti-Discrimination Agency.
EE Before reading the text in detail, scan it and find the following information:
+ whothebrochureisfor
+ what sometimes happens to people with foreign-sounding names
what it says about pay
if Muslim women are normally allowed to cover their hair at work
Protection against Discrimination in Germany
A Guide for Refugees and New Immigrants (English)
What is discrimination?
Discrimination means that one person is treated worse than another person, for example because
ofa disability
or their origins. Discrimination is prohibited in Germany.
In which areas of life does this protection against discrimination apply?
The General Equal Treatment
Act protects people from discrimination in two areas: working
life and
in specific
cases of day-to-day life. Working life means that no one may be discriminated against:
when applying for a job
with respect to working conditions
with respect
to pay
with respect
to promotion or terminations
For example, this means that people working in an enterprise may not be paid less for their work,
simply because they come from another country.
On the job and in your profession
In Germany, every person is protected from discrimination with respect to access to work, working con
ditions
and terminations. This protection also applies to professional training, for example internships...
Applying for a job and taking up employment
Finding work is very important, particularly for persons
who are new in Germany. Unfortunately, itis
precisely in this context that discrimination occurs frequently. In some cases, persons with a foreign:
sounding name are less likely
to be invited to a job interview.
This
You can do something
about this type of discrimination. No person may be discriminated against,
when applying
for a job, on the grounds of ethnic origin, gender, religion or belief, disability, age or
sexual identity
discrimination!
‘Muslim women wearing headscarves
‘Muslim women wearing headscarves also experience discrimination when job hunting. Very often,
they are rejected with the justification that customers or other employees in the firm have a problem
with the headscarf
This is not allowed! No person seeking employment may be rejected because of their religion! Excep
tions are made only for employers
who are funded by a religious community. Women who are affect-
ed by this sort of discrimination should therefore seek counselling
at all costs.
(339 words)
Source: Antidiskriminierungsstelle des Bundes (www.antidiskriminierungsstelle.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/
DE/publikationen/Refugees/Fluechtlingsbroschuere_englisch.pdf)
ER Match the highlighted words in the text with the German words and expressions in the list.
Arbeitsbedingungen + Beförderungen + Behinderung - Beratung + Geschlecht + Kopftücher + Kündigungen «
Religion - Schutz + verboten - Zugang
QQ aa Du =

--- Seite 108 ---
6 FOCUS ON WORDS
to be affected by sth
beliefs pl
bullying
disability
discrimination
ethnic origin
foreign
gender
headscarf
to humiliate sb
to ignore sb/sth
to insult sb
prohibited
protection
to reject sb/sth
sexual harassment
victim
to acknowledge sth
to apologize to sb
counselling
to discuss sth
to focus on sth
to identify sth
to modify sth
plan of action
to solve sth
to suggest sth
to trust sb
to worry about sth
Customer service and fee
to be to blame for sth
courteous
to exaggerate
face-to-face
to handle sth
improvement
to interact with sb
patience
to respond to sth
to review sth
understanding
von etw betroffen sein
Überzeugungen, Religion
Mobbing, Tyrannisieren, Schikane(n)
Behinderung
Diskriminierung
ethnische Herkunft
‚frema
Geschlecht
Kopftuch
‚jdn demütigen
jdn/etw ignorieren, jdn/etw missachten
jdn beleidigen
verboten
Schutz
jdn/etw ablehnen
sexuelle Belästigung
Opfer
etw anerkennen, etw ernst nehmen
sich bei jdm entschuldigen
Beratung
etw besprechen
sich auf etw konzentrieren
etw ermitteln, etw bestimmen
etw verändern, etw modifizieren
Aktionsplan
etw lésen
etw vorschlagen
jdm vertrauen
sich Sorgen über etw machen
an etw schuld sein
höflich
übertreiben
Ausrede
persönlich, im direkten Gespräch
etw bewältigen
Verbesserung
mit jdm kommunizieren
Geduld
auf etw reagieren
etw (erneut) prüfen
Verständnis
IN effect Auswirkung
to have religious beliefs
cyberbullying Gyber-Mobbing
AD) disabled
to discriminate against sb jdn diskriminieren
= ethnic background
foreign-sounding
fremd klingend
gender inequality Geschlechterungleichheit
plheadscarves
ADJ humiliating
to ignore a problem
ADJ insulting
= not allowed, banned
protection against sth Schutz vor etw.
to reject a request einen Antrag ablehnen
to be harassed by sb
to attack a victim
to acknowledge a mistake
Napology
counsellor Berater/in, Therapeut/in
Nto have a discussion
Nfocus
to identify a problem
= to make changes
to form a plan of action
solution Lösung
N suggestion Vorschlag
Nto build trust Vertrauen aufbauen
= to be concerned about sth
= to be at fault for sth
= respectful respektvoll
ADJ exaggerated
to make excuses sich herausreden
= in person
= to deal with sth
Vito improve
N interaction (with customers)
to be patient sich gedulden
Nresponse
IN review = Rezension, Kritik
to show sb understanding
jdm Verständnis
entgegenbringen
Appendix

--- Seite 109 ---
SCENARIO SUPPORT
Match the English words (1-10) to the German words (a-j).
work permit
7 recognize
a Gehalt
g Unterkunft
2 accommodation
8 sponsor
b_ unterschätzen
berufliche
3 jobseeker
9 salary
© anerkennen
Qualifikationen
4 paperwork
10 visa
d Arbeitssuchende/r
Papierkram
5 underestimate
e Arbeitserlaubnis
finanzieren
6 professional qualification
f Visum
Match the words to the correct definition or meaning.
post
a toimprove
or expand
2 toenhance
b_ toendorstop
3 secondment
tostay
4 subsidiary
d_jobor position
5 tosuspend
e_tostop
something temorarily or for a longer period
6 toterminate
task somebody
is asked to do
7 assignment
g posting (sending employees to another place)
8 formalities
steps and paperwork that are legally necessary
9 affiliated
acompany controlled by another company
10 toremain
connected with
Match the sentence halves to create statements from the posts.
Itisnot easy to find new friends
a with language problems.
2. Alot of people get homesick
b_ when you work in a foreign country.
3 Atthe beginning of my internship, | found
business culture when you work abroad
4 When you go abroad, don't forget that
d_ got
to know my colleagues better.
Things got a lot better when |
eit very difficult
to understand my colleagues.
6 Of course,
you will have to deal
which | found embarrassing.
7. had to ask them to repeat things
g and miss their families and friends
very often,
back home.
8 Of course you will face a different
h there will be challenges
Choose the correct answers (a, b or c) to complete the sentences.
The German word for curriculum vitae, or CV, is
a Bewerbung
b Lebenslauf
¢ Anschreiben
2 An HR professional who hires new employees is a(n)
a recruiter
b employer
applicant
Inthe US, a CVis called
a careerreport
b review
resume
Appendix
4 What people want to achieve
in their job is a career
a opportunity
b goal
perspective
5 Acting and modelling jobs are part of the = arts industry.
a show
b entertainment
performing
6 The English word for Anforderungen is
a demands
b requirements
expectations
Complete these tips for writing CVs with the phrases from the list.
a standard
CV - check
your spelling - impress
your readers - mentioned in the job advert
natural language should be logical + they are looking
for + well-structured
Don't forget to =: and grammar before you send off your CV.
Make sure you refer to the skills and qualifications
Write
a new CV for every
job advert and avoid sending = to many employers.
Show the employer
you have understood what
Don't try to == by using bright colours, large fonts or funny pictures.
Prepare «= and readable documents
Your story == and consistent.
Use professional
and = and tone.
Before you listen to the podcast, match the English words (1-16) to their German equivalents (a-p).
depot
a Abzug
2 overtime
b Akkordarbeit
hourly rate
© brutto
4 minimum wage
d einstellen
piecework
entlassen, feuern
6 sick pay
Jobsicherheit
7 medical insurance
g Krankengeld
8 job security
Krankenversicherung
9 tohire
Mindestlohn
10 tofire
mit Kündigungsfrist entlassen
1 togive notice
k netto
12 fuel
Paketzentrum
gross
m selbstständig
14 net
n Stundenlohn
15 self-employed
© Treibstoff
16 deduction
p Überstunden

--- Seite 110 ---
E-Book - Unterrichtsmanager - Focus on Bu:
SCENARIO SUPPORT
Copy the table of pros and cons below to make an overview. Add the arguments from the list
to the correct places in the overview. Some items may be used twice. They are all from the text
on page 39.
Pros
Cons
Employer
Employee
Hermes does not need to pay its couriers the £7.20 an hour living wage
self-employed
she earned £5.50 per hour over nine days
worked six days a week
worked ... three to six hours per day
without any paid holiday or sick pay and without pension contributions
paid on a piece work basis
using their own cars
they pay for their own fuel and car insurance
are free to take other jobs and have some flexibility over their working day
Match the German words and phrases (1-14) with the English equivalents (a-n).
ess .5th NRW
Appendix
Before you listen to the staff meeting, match the English words and phrases (1-10) to their German
equivalents (a-j).
Seavmanvauns
to discover
warehouse
demand
Alipay
invoice
human resources department
apprentice
retirement package
lump sum
to move
how many people want to buy a product or service
deal to let older people stop working earlier
a young person learning a job
to put in another place
the section of
a company
that trains and employs people
money paid in one amount at one time
to find something new
a place where goods are stored
a request for payment
a Chinese electronic payment platform
Match the English words in box A to their German equivalents in box B.
A to reveal - staff - salary + auditing
B Anmeldedaten  Dienstleister « durchschnitt-
company + scam - to suspect - security
lich - entdecken - erreichen - Gehalt
breach - to investigate - to accomplish
to discover + invoice « contractor
harmlos - Legitimation - Personal - Rechnung
Schwindel - Sicherheitsverletzung - unter-
inoffensive - authentication - credentials
suchen - verdienen - vermuten + Wirtschafts-
average + to earn
prüfungsgesellschaft - zeigen
Complete the statements about the text with the correct answer.
Paketzustell
t least 18
The 40-year-old
software developer was
4 The VPN connection
from the software
Selbstandige/r
b_ carmaintenance
costs
a American
developer's workstation to China was
3 Auftritt
© driving licence
b Chinese
a new
4 fest anstellen
d extraincome
inChina
b afew weeks old
Subunternehmer
e freelancer
ahead
6 Sozialkosten
giant internet retailer
His work was being done by
Internet-Handelsriese
g hourly rate
a anauditing company
It cost the software developer == of his salary
8 volljährig
h insurance
b an American colleague
to outsource
his work
Führerschein
parcel courier
aChinese contractor
most
10 Stundenlohn
performance
b asmallpart
His employer
was starting to allow
11 Versicherung
k permanentiy employ
12. Instandhaltungskosten
für Fahrzeuge
shift
a work from home
6 Everyone thought the software developer
Schicht
m social security contributions
b employ Chinese workers
was working
14 Zusatzeinkommen
n subcontractor
© gotoChina
a inChina
b normally
© onanew project

--- Seite 111 ---
SCENARIO SUPPORT
Appendix
The following paragraphs are taken from the text “Fintech-Nutzung in Deutschland und der Welt”.
Match the English words and phrases in box A to their German equivalents in box B.
They contain the relevant information for the headings 1-4 in the mediation task.
A tohaul
handcuffs + to sl
hen + Geldstrafe
« Handschell
Study how the German text is reduced to its key statements. Complete the mediated text for heading 2.
MAM ele a ae
en eee ee
towaste «a fine - truancy
Herbst- bzw. Friihjahrsferien » Kreisverwaltung
half-term - to hijack to chant
Kundgebung » scharf kritisieren « Schulschwänzen
1: Germans slow to accept fintech
totackle - to back » to attend
rufen « teilnehmen - unterstützen + verschwenden
German text:
(a) Wir Deutsche gelten gern als (b) Technikmuffel und Modernisierungsverweigerer, zumindest
wenn es um die Nutzung von (c) Online-Diensten geht. Das gilt besonders bei sensiblen Bereichen
8 von (
Read the seven paragraphs of the article and complete
the following sentences (1-7) with suitable
wie der (d) Geldanlage, der Kontoverwaltung und dem Zahlungsverkehr. [..] (e) In anderen Ländern
words or phrases from each paragraph.
(f) scheinen diese Sorgen deutlich weniger präsent zu sein.
rally + county council » aim
Ziel « zweckentfremden
The Prime Minister criticized the children for
Parents are worried they will have to pay
Parents have used
«to discuss the pros and cons of striking,
(a)Germans
(b)don'tlike
(c) online services
4 Some children stopped a bus and others blocked the
to invest money, handle bank accounts or make payments.
(e) In other countries _ (f) people don't have these problems.
Mediated text:
Germans don't like online services to invest money, handle bank accounts or make payments
In other countries people don’t have these problems.
Students believe that the public don’t know enough about the
Some schools thought it was a good idea for young people miss school and go to
‘Some pupils held banners saying that children were doing things that should be done by
2: Far higher usage of fintech in developing than developed countries
German text:
Copy the table below and complete it with the points (a-1). Put the arguments under the correct heading.
Anbietern. (b) Ähnliche Zahlen werden für das 1,3 Milliarden Einwohner zählende Indien gelten,
There are three arguments for each one.
wo [..] 52% der digital aktiven Einwohner (c) ihre Geldgeschäfte online abwickeln. [Es] folgen Groß-
britannien mit (9) 42%, Brasilien mit 40%, Australien mit 37%, Deutschland mit 35%, USA mit 33%,
Cons
Südkorea mit 32% und Japan mit 14%.
Employer
a cheaper to
(a) Most people in big developing countries
_(b) use fintech.
(c) In developing countries it is less popular.
(16) Im chinesischen WeChat (17) können die Nutzer nicht nur chatten, sondern (18) Taxis, Lebens-
mittel oder Essen bestellen, Restaurant- und Stromrechnungen bezahlen, Sticker kaufen, Jobs oder
Leute in der Nähe suchen, Arzttermine buchen, Spiele spielen und eigene Mobile-Stores betreiben.
Employee
Mediated text
Use the highlighted parts of the text to complete the mediation for headings 3 and 4.
a cheaper to pay for work as needed and not employ a full-time worker
b communication with service-provider is often not face-to-face
3: New world vs old world technology
© company secrets are less secure
Der Hauptgrund für eine deutlich häufigere Nutzung von Fintech-Lösungen in Schwellenlandern
er a Contract San SEE work
liegt vor allem darin, dass (10) [wir] noch mit (12) Desktop- PCs und Festnetzinternet (11) aufgewach
© ERDE
sen sind, während für (13) viele Chinesen und Inder der mobile Netzzugang via (14) Smartphone der
ER SEN TEN SON ANY con BESANDE Ger BEDENG NEON se dor provider
toniche erde Schott (9) ne tener SE
g workers are not asked to do jobs they have not been employed to do
h_ outsourcing company takes responsibility
for any mistakes by service-provider
Mediated text:
service-providers are experts and can do work faster and better
4: WhatsApp vs WeChat
service-providers can take away workers’ jobs
k workers can concentrate on what they do best
workers often have to talk to a different person each time they contact the service-provider
Mediated text:
QaQeaQqu

--- Seite 112 ---
SCENARIO SUPPORT
Match the words from the list with their definitions.
affordable consultant - criticize « decrease - fee - improve + increase + key + profit
rent + revenue + stand-alone « switch « up-to-date
‘An expert who helps companies and people.
Another verb which means to change, e.g. from one system
to another.
The money you have to pay someone for a service they do for you.
This adjective means the most modern, newest product, or information.
To pay the owner
of something so that you can use it.
This adjective means that the price of
a product/service is not too high for most people.
To complain about something/someone and talk about their negative points.
This verb and noun means an amount
or value goes down.
The money that comes into a company from selling its goods or providing its services.
voansausun-
10 This verb and noun means an amount
or value goes up.
11 The money
a company keeps from the selling price of
a product/service after it has paid
all the costs to make or provide the product/service.
12 Describes a product that is sold complete and normally paid for once.
13 Another word for very important.
14 Tomake something better, when something becomes better.
‘Match the sentence parts to make four phrases you can use to answer questions about a text.
According
a the point that
The text
b ontosay that
The author makes
© tothe author
4 The article goes
d saysthat
Match the sentence beginnings (1-7) with the correct endings (a-g) to make statements about
the text.
Customers
will react better
to big changes if
Existing customers should be offered
Raising workers’ salaries and reducing prices
In the long term, lower costs and winning new customers should
Employees might be unhappy about
If you increase the basic salary and explain the benefits clearly,
It’s important
to communicate with your suppliers if
Soausun-
will mean higher costs and lower revenue in the short term.
losing their bonus payments for overtime.
workers will find changing to a new work model easier.
they are informed about them in advance.
you need to change the payment and financial conditions
you have with them.
attractive prices and encouraged to make the change quickly.
mean company profits will rise.
Appendix
‘Match words from box A with words from box B to complete the English terms for the German phrases (1-11).
Unternehmensberater/in
Kunststoffverpackung
brand
es dal
3  Kunststoffabfälle
4 biologisch abbaubar
home-
compostable
Eigenmarke
own:
consultant
6 Lieferkette
pass
containers
zentralisierter Großhandel
plastic (2x)
onto
Ponies
packaging
leinere Mengen
publicity
9 Spezialbehälter
smaller
10 weitergeben
special
quantities
positiver Werbeeffekt
supply
waste
wholesalers
Choose the correct words to complete the sentences.
is w= cheaper == €0.80. (like / slightly
/ than / very much)
High quality products
are usually ==: expensive compared = low quality products. (as / less / more / to)
3 Skilogrammes is five
than 1000 grams. (heavier
/ lighter / size / times)
Petrol and diesel cars are much = for the environment = electric and hybrid cars.
(as / bad / than / worse)
5 One
of the == of using fossil fuels is that it produces a lot of == greenhouse
gases, such as carbon
dioxide, into the atmosphere. (consequences / damage
/ episode / harmful)
Write the letters of the mixed-up words in the correct order. The German translation in brackets
can help you.
If you keep fruit and vegetables cool, they will slat much longer. (halten)
You should never resot cooked meat next to uncooked meat. (lagern)
I didn’t buy the meat because the packaging was not dealse ~ somebody had already opened it.
(versiegelt)
If food is not packaged correctly, it is often madeagd during transport. (beschädigt)
(frisch bleiben)
Match the opposites.
Itis best to eat some foods soon after you buy them because they do not ainrem shref very long.
packaged
a reusable
large supermarket
chain
renounce
single-use
loose
4 support
d save
5 rent
consumer
6 waste
7 producer
g independent
food retailer

--- Seite 113 ---
SCENARIO SUPPORT
Rewrite the sentences so that they make sense. Use the words
from the list instead of the words in italics.
E-Book - Unterrichtsmanager - Focus on Bu:
deposit + discount - encouraged
organic - sources
|lonly give my children food that is grown with chemicals and man-made fertilisers.
The shop gave mea higher price off the winter jacket because it's July now.
The doctor warned me to eat more fruit and vegetables.
My local supermarket sells its meat from local cow farmers.
Most plastic bottles in Germany have a price of 20-25 cents and 8 cents for glass bottles
which you get back when you bring them for recycling
The information before and after the body of the letter (a-u) has got mixed up. Use the layout
of a business letter on page 90 to put it in the right order.
[body of the letter]
[signature]
13 December 20:
2 Corporation Parade
76530 Baden-Baden
Angela Schlanke
AS/TT
Dear Mr Connor
Enquiry about Beauty Products
Germany
k Glamour Beauty Products Ltd
Kaiserallee 83
Mr Justin Connor
Purchasing Director
Sales Director
VEREINIGTES KÖNIGREICH
Wellness Schönheitsprodukte
Wellness Schönheitsprodukte
wı7 6ID
WIGAN
Yours sincerely
Use the phrases on pages 100-101 to translate the German expressions (1-10) needed for the
enquiry into English.
bedeutend
5 inganz Europa
9 einen größeren Auftrag
2 Großhändler
6 günstig
erteilen
3 im In-und Ausland
7 aktuell
10 unseren Anforderungen
4 langjährig
8 aufWunsch
entsprechen
The information before and after the body of the letter (a-u) has got mixed up. Use the layout
of a business letter on page 90 to put
a [body
of the letter]
b [signature]
3 August
d 47533 Kleve
e ABUIA
Bloemen Recyclinganlagen
8 Bloemen Recyclinganlagen
h  Cadestrial
Zone A6
i Dear
Ms Gadanya
j  Ecofocus Services Ltd
k Export Sales Department
~§ J- GFT BHO
the right order.
Germany
Hendrik Schulz
Jahi District
Kalkarer
Ms Joyce Gadanya
NIGERIA
Offer for sorting machine
Purchasing Director
Yours sincerely
ess .5th NRW
Appendix
Use the phrases on pages 110-111 to translate the German expressions (1-10) needed for the offer
into English.
Wie heute Morgen in unserem netten Telefonat vereinbart
mit einem hervorragenden Ruf
3 was die gewünschte Anlage (equipment) betrifft
4 Unser Preis versteht sich CIF Lagos.
5 unsere Zahlungsbedingungen
6 Kasse bei Auftragserteilung
7 per Akkreditiv
8 Die Lieferung
kann sofort erfolgen.
9 ablager
10 Wir freuen uns, mit Ihnen in Geschäftsbeziehungen zu treten.
The information before and after the body of the letter (a-t) has got mixed up. Use the layout
a business letter on page 90 to put it in the right order.
a [body
of the letter]
k GolSport
b [signature]
GolSport
17 August
m Order for sleeping
bags
d 250 Neville
n_ Purchasing Director
51371 Leverkusen
© Rainer Hoffmann
Attn. Ms Judie French, Sales Department
g CARDIFF
q Taylor Outdoor
Sport Ltd
VEREINIGTES KÖNIGREICH
DearRay
s Von-Ketteler-Straße
Germany
Yours sincerely
Copy the table below and then choose 10 of the 19 headings in the box to complete it.
Article no. » Cash discount « Delivery « Description insurance « Packing - Payment - Quantity
Quantity discount - Size - Shipping charge - Subtotal - Terms
of payment - Total - Total price
25% trade discount
Transport « Unit price + VAT 20%
ESB490
Xtreme sleeping bag
Ce Wau
DAP Leverkusen within 14 days after receipt of order

--- Seite 114 ---
SCENARIO SUPPORT
Appendix
Complete the statements about the situation with the correct answer.
The information before and after the body of the letter (a-u) has got mixed up. Use the layout
1 Y&K AG has
Magee’s Electrical
Supplies Ltd. 5 The buyer has taken delivery
of a business letter on page 90 to put it in the right order.
a sold compressors
b_ received compressors from
b 150 compressors
perl
© returned compressors
b [signature]
m Forthe attention of Mr Sean Ashby, Purchasing Department
© 28 November
n Germany
Y8&K AG has received = from Magee's
6 The supplier
d 50677 Cologne
© Hocking
Electrical Supplies Ltd.
a overcharged
© 99 Dock Road
p Martin Braun
a phone call
b_ undercharged
f Angelbedarf LipinskyGmbH
b aninvoice
sent
the wrong goods to the buyer
g Angelbedarf LipinskyGmbH
Rolandstraße
© statement
h BIRMINGHAM
s VEREINIGTES KÖNIGREICH
Your order no. 47-FRD for fishing rods dated 21 November 20.
a buyer
i Lean
u Yours sincerely
Bauer
exporter
Copy the table below and then choose 11 of the 18 headings in the box to complete it.
4 Thelrish company is the
8 The supplier has overcharged
the buyer by
a buyer
Article - Article
no. - Cash discount + Delivery - Insurance - Packing - Quantity
b supplier
Quantity discount - Size - Shipping charge - Subtotal - Terms
of delivery
importer
Terms
Castaway fishing rod
The information before and after the body of the letter (a-t) has got mixed up. Use the layout
of a business letter on page 90 to put it in the right order.
a [body
of the letter]
k Invoice
no. BBS-82 for €3,375,00 dated 01 July 20.
b [signature]
Maike Schlüter
05 August
d 40699 Erkrath
n_ Richthofener
e 47Golf Road
© Seifenmanufaktur Gerhardt GmbH
f Accounting Department
p_ Seifenmanufaktur
Gerhardt GmbH
cer Girwinghan Amen
g Dear Sir or Madam
h DURHAM
VEREINIGTES KONIGREICH
s Westwood Ltd
Within 8 days after receipt of payment
Germany
Yours faithfully
10 sturdy cartons
Use the list of phrases on pages 133-134 to translate the German expressions needed for the
complaint (1-16) into English.
Before you write to the supplier, match the English expressions in box A to the correct German
1 BeiPrüfung
der Waren
9 umgehend
2 stark beschädigt
dringend benötigt
offe
‘htlich
dafür
A statement - quarter - balance
B Abrechnung - Aufzeichnungen - die geschuldete
Sie werden daft Verstandid haben dass
ist darauf zurückzuführen,
dass
12 um...%reduziert
in your favour + checked + records
Summe « Fragen = korrigieren » Quartal « Saldo
5 schlecht verpackt
3 Ihre Stellungnahme
overcharged - amend - settlement
überweisen - verglichen mit - Zahlung - zu Ihren
remit - the sum owing - queries
Gunsten - zu viel berechnet
G ua RR ube
7 Wie dem auch
15. Geschaftsbeziehung
8 Ersatz für die beschädigten
Waren
16 diese Angelegenheit
QaQeaQqu

--- Seite 115 ---
SCENARIO SUPPORT
Study the instructions
for exercise 3A on page 132 and match the sentence halves.
The above-mentioned goods were
On examining them we found
This is obviously due to
We enclose photographs of the
50 of the wardrobes are also dark brown
Please explain why our
vonsausun
We look forward to receiving
10 and feel sure you will appreciate that
Whatever
the case may be, you will appreciate that we can
We must also ask you to send us replacements for the damaged
that 5 of the 100 wardrobes ordered were badly damaged.
b order was so poorly executed.
instead of light brown as ordered,
d delivered to us today, 5 days later than expected.
the fact that the goods were poorly packed.
your comments on this matter without delay.
our future business relationship will depend on how this matter is dealt with.
only keep the 50 dark brown wardrobes if the price is reduced by 30%
g wardrobes by return, as these goods are needed urgently.
damage as proof.
Match the English words in box B to their German equivalents in box A.
A Insolvenz anmelden -
Arbeitslosigkeit + schlech-
tes Bildungssystem - Kriminalitätsrate - abwan-
dern - Anziehungskraft - Bildband - Wolken-
kratzer + sanieren + belebt Entwurf « verlassen
8 abandoned - attraction « crime rate
design - full
of life « picture book + poor
schools - skyscraper - to go bankrupt
to leave to renovate « unemployment
Match the statements (a-h) to the headings (1-4). There are two statements for each heading.
Aussagen
In 2013 Detroit went bankrupt
Empty skyscrapers are being renovated.
People left everything behind and went elsewhere.
Downtown Detroit is full of life again.
Überschriften
People abandon bankrupt city
2 Fascinating ruins
Life returns
4 Detroit's most famous architect
-8 Jat TBO
Many beautiful historical buildings were designed by German-born architect Albert Kahn
The empty ruined buildings had a great attraction for people.
People brought out picture books of the abandoned city.
He designed the Packard Plant and Michigan Central Station.
Appendix
‘Match the English words in box A to their German equivalents in box B.
A fare - coin - to proceed - turnstile - slot - to
swipe + to continue - to board « accessible
elderly - disabled - elevator - escalator - to
announce + prior
to chime » emergency
assistance - push-to-talk button
B älter - ankündigen - Aufzug + behindert
Drehkreuz + durchziehen - Fahrgeld + Glocken-
schlag - Münze - Notstandshilfe - Rolltreppe
Schlitz - Sprechtaste - vor - weitergehen
weitergehen « zugänglich + zustiegen
Before you write your comment, copy the table below and put the words from the list under the correct
headings. Find three items for each heading; you can use some of the items twice.
Pros
Cons
Rental
car (petrol/diesel)
6 comfortable
Rented bike
Public transport
cheap « comfortable - dangerous
in traffic - environmentally friendly - environmentally unfriendly
expensive - flexible - goes to all important
places - limited distance - long waiting times
not weather-protected - safe by day or night » traffic jams + uncomfortable « unsafe
at night
weather-protected
Complete the sentences with expressions from the list.
bill - en-suite - half board - to hesitate - in the near future
- to take photos - quiet
quotation - to require
a She will require a non-smoking ==" room with vegetarian food in a
==: location and will pay
her ==? by credit card on departure.
Itis
for the famous German photographer Hannah Prinz, who is coming
to Detroit
of decaying buildings.
We look forward to receiving your offer
We found your hotel on www.roomcity.usa.
Do not sé to contact us, should you ==? further information.
Please send us
==* for
a single room with «3 from 10-12 September 20.

--- Seite 116 ---
SCENARIO SUPPORT
Before you listen to the recording of the meeting, match the words (1-12) to the correct definitions (a-I).
accommodation
a professional entertainer,
eg. a singer
2 venue
b happy that something bad will not happen
artist
¢ throwing away good things
4 stage
d_ agroup of people who sing together
5 glamping
e produced with natural products
and without chemicals
6 yurt
aplacetostay, eg. a hotel or an apartment
7 organic
g a platform on which musicians perform
charity
Ha famous person
9 waste
an organisation that helps people in need
10 relieved
a traditional round tent used in Mongolia
celebrity
k luxury camping
choir
| aplace
for an event
Change the statements from the conversation to indirect
added - explained - recommended
speech using suitable verbs (in the simple past) from the list.
reported « suggested (2)
direkte Rede
indirekte Rede mit einleitendem Verb in der
Vergangenheit
“Im here because we require a suitable venue
She mm that she required a suitable venue.
“How about 5-star hotels or glamping?”
He ma?
5-star hotels
or glamping.
“O'Reilly's Catering Ltd is a good company:
He ==: O'Reilly's Catering Ltd
“I've found out that the venue can be easily reached.” | He ms that the venue could be easily reached.
“And a helicopter service is available.”
He ms that
a helicopter service was available.
“Let's invite the local church choir.”
He mn inviting the local church choir.
‘Match the English words in box
A to their German equivalents in box B.
A to pitch - facilities + similar + towel
unlikely « spacious « commonplace + sturdy
gypsy wagon » sheet » fold-out bed
cutlery « tableware - fire pit + experience
insistence - off grid - to charge - to ensure
pressure + surroundings - torch + candle
to encourage + allocation
B ähnlich - aufladen - aufschlagen + Beharren
Besteck - Bettlaken - Druck - Einrichtungen
Erlebnis» ermutigen + Feuerstelle - geräumig
Geschirr - Handtuch + Kerze « Klappbett
Kontingent - netzunabhängig - robust - sicher
stellen » Taschenlampe » Umgebung - unwahr
scheinlich - weitverbreitet - Zigeunerwagen
Appendix
Before you write your blog entry, copy the table below and put the statements under the correct heading.
There are three statements for each heading.
Advantages
Disadvantages
Camping in your own tent
Glamping
can be wet and uncomfortable - cheap + comfortable
and dry - community feeling + expensive
less fun + less luggage
to carry - less or no community
feeling - more luggage
to carry - no time
spent working
on tent - simple life closer
to nature - time spent working
on tent
Read the brochure on pages 174-175 and match the sentence beginnings (1-9) to the correct sentence
endings (2-i).
All employees must know everything
a interact with customers.
It is important to smile when dealing
b_ that they have been ignored or forgotten.
Make sure that you thank
with customers face-to-face or on the phone.
All employers should be trained how to
d about the company’s goods and services.
Employees must concentrate on the
company by asking them for feedback.
Communication with customers
your company's
goods and services.
Customers become unhappy if they feel
g customer's needs and control their own feelings
Find out what customers think of your
h_ isnot just verbal but also non-verbal.
Use feedback from customers to improve
your customers after every transaction.
Complete the statements about the text with the correct answer.
Fake customer
reviews are often
4 The reviewer's
full name = be stated
neutral
must
too positive
b needn't
too negative
mustn’t
2 Spelling mistakes are = proof of authenticity.
5 Alinktothe reviewer's own website is
a not always
a sign of self-promotion.
b always
a sometimes
never
b always
3 The number of customer reviews should
«never
correspond
to the = of the company.
6 It’s. a good idea to look at = reviews before
a quality
buying something.
b age
a thelatest
size
the best
allthe

--- Seite 117 ---
PARTNER FILES
Group A
Read the text and complete the following tasks.
Asa group, identify 4-5 questions that you can ask your classmates in order to compare Generation Z
in Germany with young American consumers.
Each member of your group should take a question and survey the rest of your class.
Come back together as a group to prepare and present your results as a presentation or gallery walk.
Where do they shop?
People think that Generation Z do all their shopping online nowadays, but in fact 60% of American Gen
Zers still ike to go to traditional bricks-and-mortar stores. How they differ from older shoppers is that
they combine online research with a visit to a store. As a result, they do not hang around shopping
malls all day, but go in knowing what they want, buy it and leave. Clever retailers have discovered this,
and the really innovative ones have blended the online and the offline world by putting more interactive
touchscreens in the stores and harnessing technology such as virtual and augmented reality to make
the real-world shopping experience more attractive for shoppers. Generation Z consumers do not like
to wait. They prefer fast and efficient assistance in-store, rather than friendly service, and most like
self-service checkouts with electronic
payment systems — cutting
out the human element altogether.
A majority prefer the option of shopping online and picking up their goods in a store while two-thirds
say they would pay alittle bit more for delivery within one hour.
Partner B
Analyse the company below and share your information with your partners.
Silverlining Cloud Services
Silverlining are an IT firm founded ten years ago. They design apps for a variety of computer operating
systems according to the requirements of their clients: businesses and educational organizations.
They were bought by a global business software company and now also offer cloud data hosting and
analysis
to their corporate clients.
Partner B
4B Ask each other questions starting: “What are you doing at ... (time) on ... (day)?
Answer using
the inform:
in your diary.
Chloe, what
are you doing
at 1p.m. on Tuesday?
Im having lunch
with Tina Bell.
Appendix
Ben Archer, NOW Events Eu
York, UK
20-26 April 20..
Wednesday,
Thursday,
Friday,
22 Apri
23 April
24 April
working
Phone Sven
breakfast in
Maier, Berlin
Farmer's
Café, York
Discuss
Attend
Attend
Give 10-min.
strategy with
German
German
presentation
Jon Hollis,
course
course
on sales
london
figures
office
(conference
room)
Meet Jo
discuss
German
German
Taylor (his
office), York
JoTaylor
FÜ discussion FÜ German
Fl German 7
Meet Fran
Lunch with
German
German
Meet Jo
Winter for
Jon Hollis at
Taylor for
lunch in the
Saffron Grill,
lunch in the
The Goat's
London
The Goat's
Head pub
Head pub
York
lunch
RES unc
ME cerman =
German
tunch
Visit leather
Meet Finance
German
Drive back
Phone
factory in
Director
to York
Marianne
Leeds
(her office),
(Shours)
Schulz,
london
Munich
leather
factory
Finance
Director
German
Prepare sales
report (1hour)
Meet sales
director (my
office), York
Attend sales El
German
presentation
(conference
room),
London
sales
presentation
Check in at
Strand Hotel,
London
5 Role-play a dialogue in which Chloe Blackburn and Ben Archer find a suitable time for
a 2-hour
meeting in York.

--- Seite 118 ---
PARTNER FILES
Appendix
Partner B
Group B
Read your File and share your information with your partners. Decide together where the points belong.
Read the text and complete
the following tasks.
Copy
the tabl
Tiand complete the SWOT
analysis.
BP IASON
RAC Sa
1 Asa group, identify 4-5 questions
that you can ask your classmates in order to compare Generation Z
ith young A\
some people do not want more things listening to them and recording their private data
peel areas aries) on alles
Each member of your group should take a question
and survey the rest of your class
there is conflict between our traditional ‘classic pen & paper’ image and this new ‘digital’ product
Come back together as a group to prepare and present your results as a presentation or gallery walk.
+ _ ourcustomers value our traditional, recyclable materials
+ _ our corporate customers want modern, internet-enabled tools
potential new market for
us with younger, digital natives
How do they respond to marketing!
younger,
dig!
Generation Z are attracted to advertising
that has a message
- young consumers want brands
Add one or two of your own ideas.
engage with them and show that they share their values. This engagement should be multi-channel:
mobile, internet, in-store and on the street. Gen Zers are multi-taskers and like marketing campaigns
that appeal in multiple ways. Being able to make someone laugh is a sure sign that you understand
them, so this generation responds well to advertising campaigns they find funny. They are three times
more likely to buy a product due to clever campaigns than older generations. They are not as easily
cows
persuaded by glamourous celebrities in advertisements. Three-quarters
trust the opinions of family and
friends more than the endorsements by Hollywood actors or pop stars. They are willing
to share their
Read the text and complete the following tasks.
opinions too: 70% give online feedback and write reviews of products and services. They tend to trust
| media infl
but only those they find
id honest. Gen
ttention
Asa group, identify 4-5 questions
that you can ask your classmates in order to compare Generation Z
ele Grace
ee ahs
and sha
companies behave than simply believing their marketing. Nearly half (45%) say they choose brands from
gure can Conte er
companies that are eco-friendly and socially responsible.
2 Each member of your group should take a question and survey the rest of your class.
died
3 Come back together
as a group to prepare and present
your results as a presentation or gallery walk
How important is the product?
Product quality is important to Generation Z-two-thirds say that quality is a priority when deciding
what to buy. And they do not just take manufacturers’ promises as guarantees of quality. Three-quarters
Partner B
say they read product reviews, watch unboxing videos online and consider friends’ opinions when
judging quality. 60% say they buy brands that reflect their personality and 40% say they are willing
pay more for a brand they believe in. But that loyalty isn’t a guarantee that Gen Zers will stick with a
brand. Today's young consumers are not as loyal
to brands as their older counterparts. Only 16% shop
ata single store for their clothing and fashion needs. Sustainability is also
a priority for this market.
Three-quarters of them consider
the environmental impact of product manufacture and such things
as packaging. They are also willing to pay more for products and services which are eco-friendly —
packaging-free goods and organic food, for example. Access
to products and services is more important
to the American Gen Z than ownership of the actual products. Accessing products and services instead
of buying them also means less worry about repairing broken belongings, replacing stolen items or
disposing of e-waste.
Use the model dialogues and the Language help to role-play the following telephone conversation.
English-speaking caller (Don/Debbie Gibson, US Electrics)
Sie können leider nur wenig Deutsch. Fragen Sie, ob Ihr/e Gesprächspartner/in Englisch kann.
Stellen Sie sich mit Vor- und Nachnamen vor und bitten Sie darum, Frau Annette Stadler in der
Finanzabteilung
zu sprechen.
Tun Sie, was Ihr Gesprächspartner/in möchte.
+ _ Begrüßen Sie den Vorschlag und bitten Sie um Rückruf.
Sie haben keine weiteren Wünsche.
SchlieBen Sie das Gespräch höflich ab.
QaQeaQqu

--- Seite 119 ---
PARTNER FILES
Groupe
Read the text and complete the following tasks.
Asa group, identify 4-5 questions that you can ask your classmates in order to compare Generation Z
in Germany with young American consumers.
2 Each member of your group should take a question and survey the rest of your class.
3 Come back together
as a group to prepare and present your results as a presentation or gallery walk.
How price conscious are they?
Older people think that the young do not appreciate the value of money, but Generation Z are quite
price conscious and are willing
to shop around for the best deals. Gen Zers are experts at finding special
offers online and taking advantage of mobile apps that offer money-off vouchers. While 30% say they
use money-off coupons and vouchers, 73% say they join loyalty schemes if they receive discounted prices.
They are also open to innovative pricing models. Only 38% of them still listen to music on CDs with the
rest streaming
their music either through free ad-based apps or subscription-based premium services.
This subscription model has spread to movie and TV streaming, gaming, computer software, e-books,
fashion and even household goods and food. 73% of Gen Z consumers say they are open to ‘renting’
clothes rather than buying,
and a slightly lower number (71%) are willing
to sign up to replenishment
programmes — receiving a new supply of batteries every two months, for example.
Partner C
Analyse the company below and share your information with your partners.
Sensitiva
Sensitiva manufacture a wide range of sensors and cameras for industry. These range from infrared sensors
for military aircraft to optical cameras for quality testing in the pharmaceutical industry. Five years ago,
they bought a software company specializing in artificial intelligence and can now provide ‘smart’ sensors
such as facial and handwriting recognition which are linked to Sensitiva’s Analysor supercomputer.
Partner C
Read your File and share
your information with your
partners. Decide together
where the points belong.
we have a strong supply chain for the pen & notebook manufacture
we lack experience in electronic devices and need reliable partners
our existing customers are willing
to pay higher prices for quality
+ _ corporate customers may have worries about data security
Copy
the table on page
Bears > saci
+ _ price might be too high for younger customers
analysis.
‘Add one or two of your own ideas.
GLOSSARY OF BUSINESS TERMS
In the EU, there are two basic types of company,
the private limited company (GB: Ltd; German: GmbH)
and the public limited company (GB: plc; German: AG). In the USA and Canada there are three types
‘of company, as follows:
Incorporated company (Inc.) There is no exact equivalent of an incorporated company in the EU
‘incorporated’ simply means ‘registered as a company. It does not say anything about ownership or
liability, or capitalization.
Close corporation (Corp.) This is the North American equivalent
of the British Ltd and German GmbH.
Close corporations have a small number of shareholders (here: Gesellschafter/in) and do not offer
their shares on the stock market (Börse),
+ Open corporation (Corp) The North American equivalent
of the British PLC and German AG. Open
corporations usually have numerous shareholders (here: Aktionär/in), often other corporations,
and sell their shares on the stock market.
In South Africa, Australia and New Zealand the equivalents of the British Ltd and plc are proprietary
limited company (Pty Ltd) and proprietary company (Pty).
Asole trader (USA: sole proprietor) is the single owner of a company and takes all the decisions.
He/She gets all the profit from the company, but also bears all the risks.
‘As trade becomes more and more global, goods travel further and further, crossing geographical, cultural
and language barriers on their way. For this reason it is essential that importers and exporters agree to use
the same terms of reference.
In 1936 the International Chamber
of Commerce in Paris invented a set of International Commercial Terms
(Incoterms® rules) to define importers’ and exporters’ rights and obligations, such as transport costs, risk,
insurance, customs duty, documentation, loading and unloading. Since then the Incoterms® rules have
been revised eight times to keep up with developments in the field of international trade and translated
into many different languages. The last revision was in 2020. There are now eleven Incoterms® rules, seven
of which can be used for any mode or combined modes of transport, e.g. truck, train, ship or rail. The other
four are used for ship or inland waterway transport only.
Rules for any mode or modes of transport
EXW (EX WORKS)
Ab Werk
The seller makes the goods available at his premises. The buyer bears all
the costs and risks of transporting the goods to their destination
FCA (FREE CARRIER)
Frei Frachtführer
The seller loads the goods on board the first! carrier's vehicle. The buyer
bears all the costs and risks of transporting the goods to their destination.

--- Seite 120 ---
GLOSSARY OF BUSINESS TERMS
CPT (CARRIAGE PAID TO)
Frachtfrei bis
The seller bears all the costs and risks until
the goods are handed over to the first carrier.
He pays the transport costs, without insurance,
for the main carriage to the named destination.
The buyer insures the goods
for the main
carriage and bears all other costs.
DAP (DELIVERED AT PLACE)
Geliefert benannter
The seller bears
all the costs and risks until
the goods have reached their destination.
The buyer
is responsible
for import duties
and unloading
the goods.
DDP (DELIVERED DUTY PA
Geliefert Zoll bezahlt
CIP (CARRIAGE AND INSURANCE PAID TO)
Frachtfrei versichert bis
The seller bears
all the costs and risks until
the goods are handed over to the first carrier.
He pays the transport costs, including all-risk?
insurance,
for the main carriage to the named
destination. The buyer bears all other costs.
DPU (DELIVERED NAMED PLACE UNLOADED)
Geliefert benannter Ort entladen
The seller bears
all the costs and risks until the
goods have reached the named place and is
also responsible
for unloading them. The buyer
bears all other costs.
The seller bears
all the costs and risks until the goods have reached
their destination, including import
duties. The buyer is responsible for unloading the goods.
Rules for sea and inland waterway transport
FAS (FREE ALONGSIDE SHIP)
Frei Längsseite Schiff
The seller delivers the goods alongside the
ship at the port of shipment. The buyer bears
all the costs and risks of transporting
goods to their destination.
CFR (COST AND FREIGHT)
Kosten und Fracht
The seller delivers the goods on board the ship
at the port of shipment. He pays the transport
costs, without insurance, for the main carriage
to the port of destination. The buyer insures
the goods for the main carriage and bears all
other costs.
FOB (FREE ON BOARD)
Frei an Bord
The seller delivers the goods
on board
the ship
at the port of shipment. The buyer bears all
the costs and risks of transporting
the goods
to their destination
CIF (COST, INSURANCE AND FREIGHT
[.. named port of destination])
Kosten, Versicherung und Fracht
The seller bears
all the costs and risks untilthe
goods are delivered on board the ship at the
port of shipment. He pays the transport costs,
including basic? insurance, to the named port
of destination. The buyer bears all other costs
Appendix
Air waybill (AWB)
The airline issues the air waybill to the consignor/exporter of the goods. itis a receipt
for the goods and a contract of carriage. It is not a document of title (see Document of title). A copy
accompanies
the goods to their destination.
Bill of lading (B/L, plural: Bs/L) The shipping company or carrier issues the bill of lading to the consignor/
exporter of the goods. It is a document of title, a receipt for the goods and a contract of carriage.
‘An on-board (shipped) bill of lading shows that the goods have been loaded on board a carrier's vehicle
or vessel. A received-for-shipment bill of lading only shows that the goods have been received by a carrier
but might not yet have been loaded on board a vehicle or vessel. A bill of lading
is described as ‘clean’ if
the goods are in apparent good order and ‘fou!’ if they are not. A copy accompanies
the goods to their
destination
Certificate of origin A certificate of origin shows which country the goods are from. It is issued by a
chamber of commerce in the exporter's country.
Combined transport waybill This document is used for multi-modal transport, e.g. a container sent by
road-sea-road.
Commercial
invoice This document is a request for payment. It contains details of the goods, the sum to
be paid, the terms of delivery and payment and the buyer and seller's addresses.
Consignment note This document is for road or rail transport. It is issued to the consignor/exporter of the
goods by the railway or haulage company. It is a receipt for the goods and a contract of carriage. It is not
a document
of title. A copy accompanies
the goods to their destination.
Document of title The holder of a document of title owns the goods described in it.
A document of title can
be bought or sold without moving the goods from one place to another. It is often used in international
trade. A bill of lading is a document
of title to a consignment
of goods transported by sea.
Insurance certificate This is an extract from the insurance policy. It contains details of the insurer and the
insured, the goods insured and the sum for which they are insured. It includes details of the risks covered,
the time for which they are covered and any geographical restrictions, e.g. the route to be taken by the
ship or plane.
Packing list The packing list is put both inside the container with the goods and on the outside of the
container. It lists the goods in the container.
Pro-forma invoice This document shows how much the goods will or would cost. It is not a request for
payment. It contains details
of the goods, the price, the terms
of delivery and payment
and the buyer and
seller's addresses. It is normally used for a quotation, for payment in advance, for goods sent on approval
orto opena letter of credit (Akkreditiv)
Shipping note (S/N) A document signed by the ship's chief officer when goods are taken on board.
Shipping documents
This is all the documentation used when exporting goods (commercial invoice, bill
of lading, insurance certificate, certificate of origin, etc)
Single administrative document This is a single document describing a consignment of goods issued by
the customs authorities. It makes importing and exporting goods within the EU easier. It contains copies
for the importer and exporter, the importer’s and exporter’s customs authorities and for transit through
other countries

--- Seite 121 ---
GLOSSARY OF BUSINESS TERMS
advice of dispatch
airfreight
air waybill (AWB)
approval: on approval
bill of lading (8/t)
on-board bill of lading
received-for-shipment bill of lading
bonded warehouse
cargo
cargo liner
cargo space
certificate of origin (C/O)
chamber of (industry and) commerce
combined transport waybill
commercial invoice
consignment note [road or rail]
consignee
consignor
consular invoice
contract of carriage
customs clearance
customs declaration
dangerous goods certificate
delivery note
destination; port
of destination
export licence
forwarders certificate of receipt (FCR)
freight
freight rates
import licence
to take out insurance
insurance certificate (IC)
to insure goods against a risk
toissue
loss; total or pa
packing list
pro forma invoice (P/!)
rail consignment note
receipt
10-10 (roll on-roll off) ferry/vessel
shipping note (S/N)
single
administrative document
loss
warehouse
waybill (WB)
Versandanzeige
Luftfracht
Luftfrachtbrief
zur Ansicht, auf Probe
Seefrachtbrief, Konnossement
Bordkonnossement
Übernahmekonnossement
Zollverschlusslager
Ladung, Fracht
Frachtschiff
Frachtraum
Ursprungszeugnis
(industrie- und) Handelskammer
kombinierter Warenbegleitschein
Handelsrechnung
Frachtbrief [Straßen- oder Bahn-]
Empfainger/in
Absender/in, Versender/in
Konsularrechnung, Konsulatsfaktura
Beförderungsvertrag
Zollabfertigung
Zollinhaltserklärung
Zollrechnung, Zollfaktura
Gefahrgutbescheinigung
Lieferschein
Bestimmungsort; Bestimmungshafen
Exportlizenz
Spediteuriibernahmebescheinigung
Fracht
Frachttarife
Einfuhrgenehmigung
eine Versicherung abschließen
Versicherungsschein, -police
Ware gegen ein Risiko versichern
ausstellen, ausfertigen
Verlust; Gesamt- oder Teilverlust
Packliste
Proforma-Rechnung
Bahnfrachtbrief
Erhalt; Empfangsbescheinigung
von Straßenfahrzeugen befahrbare/s Fahre/Schiff
Schiffszettel, Warenbegleitschein
Einheitspapier
Lager
Frachtbrief
Appendix
Here is a list of the most common types of packaging used when transporting goods.
bag (big); pouch (small)
Tasche
bag (small)
Beutel
bale
Ballen
barrel
Fass
barrel; drum
Tonne
basket
Korb
bottle
Flasche
Kasten, Schachtel
box; crate
Kiste
bubble envelope
Luftpolstertasche
can; tin
Dose
carton
Karton
carton; packet
Paket
envelope
Umschlag
pallet
Laderost, Pallette
roll
Rolle
sack
Sack
sea container
Seecontainer
tube
Tube
Here is a list of the most common terms of payment in international trade.
payment in advance
cash with order (CWO)
payment by irrevocable
and confirmed
documentary (letter of) credi
documents against payment (0/P) /
cash against documents (CAD)
cash on delivery (COD)
30% with order, 70% on completion
% with order, s on delivery, s within 30 days
after delivery
payment within 30/60/90 days from
date of invoice
10 days 2%, 30 days net
payment on receipt of goods
payment on receipt of invoice
documents against (three months’) acceptance (D/A)
‘open account terms with monthly/
quarterly settlement
Vorauszahlung/Vorkasse
Kasse bei Auftragserteilung
Zahlung durch unwiderrufliches und bestätigtes
Dokumentenakkreditiv
Kasse gegen Dokumente
gegen Nachnahme
30% bei Auftragserteilung, 70% bei Fertigstellung
Ys bei Auftragserteilung, 74 bei Lieferung, V innerhalb
von 30 Tagen nach Lieferung
Zahlung innerhalb von 30/60/90 Tagen nach
Rechnungsdatum
‚Zahlung innerhalb 10 Tagen abzüglich 2% Skonto oder
innerhalb 30 Tagen netto
Zahlung bei Erhalt der Waren
Zahlung bei Rechnungserhalt
Dokumente gegen (DreimonatsJakzept
offenes Zahlungsziel mit monatlicher/vierteljährlicher
Abrechnung

--- Seite 122 ---
GLOSSARY OF BUSINESS TERMS
Appendix
Methods of payment in foreign trade
The most common methods
of payment are:
A documentary credit step by step
buyer
sell
to pay by di
tary
credit.
Bank transfer (Überweisung) Since the creation of the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA) in 2008 it has been
2. The buyer instructs his bank to open a documentary credit in the exporter’s favour.
possible
to make international bank transfers electronically between the banks of member states as
3 The buyer's bank opens the documentary credit and instructs
the seller’s bank
to inform
quickly and cheaply as for domestic transfers. To make an international transfer itis necessary to know the
ayee's Bank Identifier Code (BIC) and International Bank Account Number (IBAN).
oe Seeman men ee
4. The seller's bank tells the seller which documents he needs.
Bill of exchange (B/E) (Wechsel/Tratte) A bill of exchange (draft) is a promise by the buyer
to pay the seller
5 The seller ships the goods
a sum of money on an agreed date. It is an instrument of payment used in international trade,
e.g with a
6 Theseller presents the documents stipulated in the documentary credit to his bank.
letter of credit or documentary collection.
7 The seller’s bank checks the documents and, if they are as stipulated, pays the seller as agreed.
8 Theseller‘
Cheque (Scheck) Cheques (AE: checks) are widely used in North America. They are still used in the United
5 ie een
Baus
Kingdom, Ireland, and France but losing are popularity in favour of electronic means of payment
PD Geiitaqrecsiey oe rears peer
Documentary collection (Dokumenteninkasso) In this case there is no guarantee of payment. The seller's
bank forwards
the shipping documents
to the buyer's bank and pays the seller when it has received the
money from the buyer's bank. With documents against payment (D/P), the buyer's bank gives the buyer
the shipping documents if the buyer pays for them immediately. With documents against acceptance
(D/A), the buyer’s bank gives the buyer the shipping documents if the buyer promises to pay for them later
(e.g. 30, 60 or 90 days later). In both cases
the seller waits longer for payment
than with a documentary
credit.
Documentary credit (Dokumentenakkreditiv) Payment by confirmed and irrevocable documentary credit is
the safest method of payment in international trade. In simple terms, the buyer's bank promises
to pay the
seller’s bank if the seller gives his bank the shipping documents for the goods. The buyer's bank stipulates
exactly which documents the seller must give to his bank (e.g. the transport document [bill of lading or air
waybill
or consignment note], the commercial invoice,
the certificate of origin,
the insurance certificate
etc). The seller gives these documents to his bank. The bank checks them and, if they are correct, pays the
seller. The seller's bank now sells the documents to the buyer's bank. The buyer's bank sells the documents
to the buyer. The buyer uses them to collect the goods
at the port/airport/terminal
A letter
of credit can be confirmed
and irrevocable. If it is confirmed,
the seller’s bank promises
to pay the
seller as long as the seller gives it documents stipulated by the buyer's bank. If the documentary credit is
irrevocable, none of the details of the credit can be changed, e.g. the name of the ship, the route, the
quantity of goods etc.
See also the diagram on page 209: A documentary credit step by step.
Draft (Tratte) (> Bill of exchange)
PayPal This is an online payment system which can be used in and between many countries all over the
world. In China PayPal can only be used for domestic payments.
‘SWIFT The Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication (SWIFT) is an international
network used to transfer funds all over the world. It has data centres in the United States, the Netherlands
and Switzerland.
QaQeaQqu

--- Seite 123 ---
GLOSSARY OF BUSINESS TERMS
a/c account
AOB any other business
approx. approximate(ly)
asap as soon as possible
attn attention
‘Ave. (BE) Av. (AE) Avenue
AWB air waybill
B/E bill of exchange
B/L bill
of lading
bn billion
Bros brothers
BST British Summer Time
CAD cash against documents
ec carbon copy
CC Chamber
of Commerce
CEO Chief Executive Officer
fo care of
C/O certificate
of origin
COD cash on delivery
er credit
WO cash with order
D/A documents against acceptance
deb debit
dep. departure
Dept department
D/P documents against payment
Enc(s) enclosure(s)
EBOE errors and omissions excepted
est. established; estimated
ETA estimated
time of arrival
excl. excluding
ft foot, feet [length]
FYI(0) for your information (only)
gal(s). gallon(s)
GDP gross domestic product
GMT Greenwich Mean Time
GNP gross national product
HGV heavy goods vehicle
hip. horsepower
IC insurance certificate
incl. including
10U 1 Owe You
K thousand
Ib(s) pounds) [weight]
Konto
vormittags (> p.m.)
Sonstiges, Verschiedenes [Tagesordnung]
ungefähr
so bald wie möglich
‚zu Händen (von) (z. Hd.)
Allee
Luftfrachtbrief
Wechsel
Seefrachtbrief, Konnossement
Milliarde [USA]
Gebrüder
britische Sommerzeit
Zahlung gegen Dokumente
Kopie, Durchschrift
Handelskammer
Vorstandsvorsitzende/r
vergleiche (vgl.)
bei [Adresse], zu Händen (von)
Ursprungszeugnis
‚Zahlung bei Lieferung
Haben; Kredit (> deb)
‚Zahlung bei Auftragserteilung/Bestellung
Dokumente gegen Wechselakzept
Soll, Debet (> cr)
‚Abreise, Abfahrt, Abflug
Abteilung
Dokumente gegen Zahlung
Anlage(n)
Irrtümer und Auslassungen vorbehalten
gegründet; geschätzt
voraussichtliche Ankunftzeit
ausschließlich, ohne
Fuß [30,48 cm]
(nur) zu Ihrer information
Gallone(n) [GB: 4,546 |, USA:3,785 I]
Bruttoinlandsprodukt
Greenwicher Zeit
Bruttosozialprodukt
(Schwer-JLastfahrzeug
Pferdestärke(n) (PS) [Kfz]
Versicherungsschein
das heißt (d.h.)
einschließlich, mit
Schuldanerkenntnis, Schuldschein
tausend
Pfund [0,454 kg]
U/C (plural: Ls/C) letter
of credit
m million(s)
max maximum
MD Managing Director
mi . minimum
mise miscellaneous
mpg miles per gallon
mph miles
per hour
n/a non-applicable; not available
no. (nos) number(s)
oz ounce(s) [weight]
pa. perannum
PA personal assistant
P/A power
of attorney
pd paid
pls please
PO Box post office box
pp on behalf
P&P postage and packing
PS postscript
PTO please turn over
atly quarterly
Rd Road
R&D research and development
ref. reference
reg(d). registered
rep representative
r0-10 roll-on roll-off
RRP recommended retail price
sae stamped addressed envelope
S/N shipping note(s)
sq square
Sq. Square
St Street
SWIFT Society for Worldwide interbank
Financial Telecommunication
TM trademark
VAT value added tax
via by way of [named place]
vol. volume
wils) week(s)
ydls) yard(s) [length]
Appendix
Akkreditiv
Million(en)
Höchst.
Geschäftsführer/in
Mindest-
Verschiedenes
Meilen pro Gallone
Meilen pro Stunde
nicht zutreffend; nicht verfügbar
Nummer(n), Nr.
Unze(n) [28,359]
pro Jahr
persönlicher Assistent/in
Vertretungsvollmacht
bezahlt
bitte
nachmittags (> a.m.)
Postfach
im Auftrag (i.A)
Porto und Verpackung
Postskriptum, Nachsatz
bitte wenden (b.w)
vierteljährlich
Straße (Str)
Forschung und Entwicklung
Bezug, Bezugszeichen
eingetragen; eingeschrieben [Post]
Vertreter/in
von Straßenfahrzeugen befahrbar [Schiff]
unverbindliche Preisempfehlung
frankierter und adressierter Rückumschlag
Schiffszettel, Warenbegleitschein(e)
Quadrat(-)
Platz
Straße
Gesellschaft für internationalen Bankverkehr
(eingetragenes) Warenzeichen
Mehrwertsteuer (MwSt,
über [Ortsangabe]
Volumen; Band [Buch]
Woche(n)
Yard(s) [91,4 em]

--- Seite 124 ---
SKILLS U
PRÜFUNGSSTRATEGIEN
In den Klausuren der Jahrgangsstufen 11 und 12 sowie in der Vor- und Abschlussklausur werden die
Kompetenzbereiche Rezeption, Produktion, Mediation und Interaktion überprüft.
Rezeption bedeutet, englische gesprochene und geschriebene Texte zu verstehen. Das heißt, dass unter
diesem Aufgabenteil das Hörverstehen sowie das Leseverstehen geprüft werden.
Produktion bedeutet, dass Texte und Mitteilungen formuliert werden. Dies kann mündlich und schriftlich
erfolgen. In der Abschlussprüfung
wird lediglich die schriftliche Produktion (in Form einer rollenbasierten
Stellungnahme) abgefragt.
Mit Mediation wird die Fähigkeit bezeichnet, durch Übertragung oder Umschreibung mündlich oder
schriftlich zwischen Kommunikationspartnern zu vermitteln. Wichtig ist es dabei, sich bewusst zu machen,
dass es nicht um eine Übersetzung geht.
Interaktion ist die Fähigkeit, Gespräche in der Zielsprache zu führen bzw. Mitteilungen auszutauschen.
Darunter fällt der Austausch von schriftlicher Korrespondenz, also die Geschäftsbriefe.
Die Abschlussprüfung setzt sich aus 40% Rezeption (Hörverstehen 20% und Leseverstehen 20%),
40% Produktion/Interaktion (20% rollenbasierte Stellungnahme, 20% Geschäftskorrespondenz) und
20% Mediation (Übertragung vom Deutschen ins Englische) zusammen. Jede Aufgabe hat somit eine
Gewichtung von 20%.
Die mündliche Rezeptionsaufgabe (Hörverstehen) hat eine Länge von ca. 3 Minuten, der schriftliche
Rezeptionstext besteht aus 300-400 Wörtern, und die Mediationsaufgabe (Übertragung vom Deutschen
ins Englische) umfasst eine Länge von ca. 250 Wörtern.
Die Prüfung beginnt mit dem Hörverstehen (mündliche Rezeptionsaufgabe). Für die nachfolgenden
‚Aufgaben der Prüfung gibt es keine festgelegte Reihenfolge. Die Reihenfolge ergibt sich aus dem Hand-
lungsrahmen der jeweiligen Abschlussarbeit.
Schon während Ihres zweijährigen Unterrichts in der Höheren Berufsfachschule ist es ratsam, sich an ein
bestimmtes Vorgehen zu gewöhnen:
Lesen Sie die Aufgabenstellung sorgfältig durch. Was genau wird von Ihnen verlangt?
Lesen Sie dann die Fragen konzentriert und aufmerksam. Versuchen Sie, sie richtig zu verstehen —
das gilt für Fragen auf Englisch und auf Deutsch!
Während der Einlesephase haben Sie nicht sehr viel Zeit. Sollte es aber so sein, dass Sie eine englische
Frage nicht verstehen, schlagen Sie die unbekannten Wörter im Lexikon nach, so dass Ihnen klar wird,
worum es in der Frage geht. Je schneller Sie mit dem Lexikon sind, desto mehr können Sie gegebenenfalls
nachschlagen. Also üben Sie den Umgang damit bei jeder sich Ihnen bietenden Gelegenheit.
Danach können Sie gezielt nach den möglichen Antworten hören. Da die Hörverstehensaufgabe
je nach Bezirk 2-3 Mal abgespielt
wird, sollten Sie sich schon beim ersten Hören Notizen
machen.
während
Hörens
nachen,
Achten Sie auf Schlüsselwörter. Übergehen Sie Wörter, die Sie nicht verstehen.
Schreiben Sie beim ersten Durchgang nicht zu viel, da Sie sonst den Anschluss an das Hörverstehen
verpassen könnten.
Nutzen Sie auch die Pausen zwischen dem Abspielen, um zu schreiben. Beim weiteren Hören können
Sie Ihre Notizen noch vervollständigen.
Appendix
Verlieren Sie beim Hören nie die Fragen aus den Augen. Die Fragen sind chronologisch aufgebaut und
geben der Aufgabe Struktur. Vielleicht werden in der ein oder anderen Frage auch schon Begriffe genannt,
die Sie beim Hören wiedererkennen und die Ihnen bei der Beantwortung der Fragen helfen können.
Wichtig ist es, ruhig zu bleiben. Werden Sie nicht nervös
oder panisch. Auch wenn Sie beim ersten
Hören wenig verstanden haben, wird der Text für Sie beim weiteren Hören regelmäßig besser zu
verstehen sein, da Sie sich an das Tempo, die Stimme und den Dialekt gewöhnen.
Es wird unterschiedlich gehandhabt, ob die Fragen auf Deutsch oder Englisch gestellt sind und beantwor-
tet werden sollen. Dies hängt davon ab, wie Ihre Lehrkraft die Abschlussarbeit gestaltet.
Sollten Sie beim Hören Teile inhaltlich nicht verstanden haben, ist es immer sinnvoll, sich diese so aufzu-
schreiben, wie Sie sie verstanden haben. Vielleicht helfen Ihnen diese Notizen später insofern,
als Sie aus
dem Kontext der Hörverstehensaufgabe die ein oder andere Frage doch noch richtig beantworten können.
Wenn die Aufgaben auf Deutsch beantwortet werden sollen, kann es für Sie auch leichter sein, sich zunächst
Notizen auf Englisch zu machen, die Sie dann später übersetzen. Den wenigsten Schülerinnen und Schülern
gelingt es, etwas in der Fremdsprache Gehörtes direkt auf Deutsch zu beantworten (zu den unterschied-
lichen Fragetypen siehe z.B. Unit 2, Scenario B, in dem deutsche Fragen gestellt werden, 5.38 oder Unit 2,
Scenario G, in dem englische Fragen gestellt werden, 5. 58).
Bei der schriftlichen Rezeption, dem Leseverstehen, können die Aufgaben zum Text auf Englisch oder
Deutsch gestellt sein (Deutsch siehe z.B. Unit 2, Scenario B, Aufgabe 2, S. 38; Englisch z.B. Unit 3, Part A,
‚Aufgabe 24, S. 67). Gleiches gilt auch für die von Ihnen verlangten Antworten. Lesen Sie sich die Aufgaben-
stellung also sorgfältig dahingehend durch, in welcher Sprache Sie Ihre Antworten verfassen sollen.
Neben dem Hinweis auf die Sprache bekommen Sie durch die Fragen auch schon einen Hinweis auf den
Textinhalt. Danach lesen Sie die Überschrift des Textes und gegebenenfalls die Unterüberschriften. Arbeiten
Sie die unbekannten Wörter heraus. Bevor Sie also richtig mit der Textarbeit beginnen, haben Sie durch den
Inhalt der Überschriften bereits eine erste Idee davon, was in dem zu lesenden Text vorkommen wird.
Es scheint im ersten Augenblick leichter, die Aufgaben auf Englisch zu beantworten, da der Text auf Eng-
lisch ist. Eine große Gefahr hierbei ist, dass Sie es sich zu einfach machen und die geforderte Antwort aus
dem englischen Lesetext abschreiben. Dafür gibt es aber keine Punkte. Versuchen Sie, sich von der Vorgabe
zu lösen und verfassen Sie die Antworten in eigenen Worten. Auch wenn Ihre Antworten wahrscheinlich
einfacher oder sprachlich weniger elegant klingen werden als der Inhalt des vorgegebenen Textes, ist es
wichtig,
die Antworten selbstständig
zu formulieren, denn nur diese Eigenarbeit kann benotet werden!
Wie gehe ich mit dem unbekannten Text um?
Lesen Sie sich zunächst den Text durch und versuchen Sie, so viel wie möglich zu verstehen. Schauen
Sie auf Schlüsselwörter, die Sie vielleicht schon thematisch aus dem Unterricht kennen.
Unterstreichen Sie beim Lesen unbekannte Wörter.
Mit unbek:
Wörtern umgehen,
Übersetzen Sie nach dem Lesen die unterstrichenen Wörter mit Hilfe des ein- oder zweisprachigen
Wörterbuchs (eine Empfehlung
ist hier das zweisprachige) und schreiben Sie die übersetzten
Wörter am besten über das unbekannte englische Wort oder daneben auf die gleiche Zeile.
Ergeben sich dann noch Verständnisschwierigkeiten, wiederholen Sie den gerade geschilderten Vorgang.
Prüfen Sie immer, ob das von Ihnen nachgeschlagene Wort inhaltlich zu dem Text passen kann und es kon
textuell Sinn macht. Sollte dies nicht der Fall sein, prüfen Sie, ob dieses Wort vielleicht noch eine andere
Bedeutung haben kann. Verlieren Sie bei der Arbeit an dem Text nie den gesamten Text aus den Augen.

--- Seite 125 ---
SKILLS U
‘Am Anfang dauert es für viele Schülerinnen und Schüler lange, bis man Wörter im Wörterbuch gefunden
hat. Dies wird Ihnen immer schneller gelingen,
je mehr Sie mit dem Wörterbuch üben. Nutzen Sie die
Chancen, die sich dazu im Unterricht ergeben und nehmen Sie dazu nicht Ihr Mobiltelefon oder andere
(zunächst schnellere) Übersetzungshilfen. Diese haben Sie nämlich in der Abschlussprüfung nicht zur
Hand; und haben Sie wenig mit dem Wörterbuch geübt, könnte es sein, dass Ihnen am Ende durch das
Heraussuchen der Wörter wichtige Zeit bei anderen Aufgaben fehlt.
Nachdem Sie den Text erarbeitet haben, markieren Sie für sich die Stellen, die Sie für die Beantwortung
der Fragen brauchen. Normalerweise werden die Fragen zum Text in der Reihenfolge gestellt, in der die
Informationen im Text zu finden sind. Wenn von Ihnen verlangt wird, Wh-Fragen zum Text zu beantworten,
denken Sie daran, dass:
Who nach Menschen fragt. Suchen Sie Informationen über die Hauptperson des Textes
Where nach einem Ort fragt.
When nach einer Zeit fragt. Suchen Sie nach Wochentagen, Daten oder Uhrzeiten.
What nach Objekten und Ereignissen fragt. Suchen Sie nach Informationen darüber
oder Vorschlägen,
warum etwas passiert (ist)
Why nach einem Grund fragt. Suchen Sie nach Erklärungen, warum etwas passiert (ist)
How nach einer Methode fragt. Suchen Sie Beschreibungen, wie etwas gemacht wird
Lesen Sie sich nach der Beantwortung der Fragen den Text ein weiteres Mal durch. Vielleicht entdecken Sie
dabei noch weitere Informationen,
die zu den Fragen passen. Sollte das der Fall sein, ergänzen Sie Ihre
Antworten dahingehend
Eine weitere Priifungsaufgabe ist das Schreiben einer Stellungnahme (Produktion). Diese gliedert sich in
der Regel in Einleitung, Argumentation mit Begründung und in die eigene Meinung. Um diese Aufgabe gut
zu bearbeiten, ist es zunächst einmal ganz wichtig,
dass Sie sich die Aufgabenstellung gründlich durch-
lesen, damit Sie über das richtige Thema schreiben.
Einleitung
Machen Sie sich klar, worüber Sie die Stellungnahme schreiben sollen. Ihre Aufgabe wird es sein, die
Stellungnahme aus dem situativen Kontext der Handlungssituation heraus zu schreiben
Daraus leitet sich auch Ihre Einleitung ab, in der das Thema der Stellungnahme genannt wird. Dies könnte
2.B. bei Unit 6 „Dealing with conflicts at work“ die Frage sein, ob ein Firmenausflug eine sinnvolle Idee wäre,
um zwischenmenschlichen Problemen am Arbeitsplatz vorzubeugen. Ihre Aufgabe könnte dann lauten,
eine Stellungnahme für den Personalchef vorzubereiten:
‚Argumentation
In der Aufgabenstellung sollte angegeben sein, wie viele Argumente Sie nennen sollen. Sammeln Sie
‚Argumente dafür und dagegen, und notieren Sie sich diese auf einem Extrapapier. Sie sollten auf jeden Fall
ein ausgewogenes Verhältnis
von Pro- und Gegenargumenten anstreben.
Wenn Sie die Stellungnahme verfassen, bedenken Sie zunächst, dass es in diesem Teil um eine neutrale
Darstellung von Argumenten geht. Sie stellen die Vor- und Nachteile des Themas dar. Die Reihenfolge
Ihrer Darstellung ist dabei beliebig. Sie sollten sich daran orientieren,
wie es Ihre Lehrkraft Ihnen beige
bracht hat.
Jedes Argument wird in einem eigenen Absatz verfasst. Ein neues Argument erhält einen neuen Absatz
Appendix
Begründung
Vergessen Sie bei der Darstellung nicht, für jedes Argument auch eine Begründung zu liefern -es reicht
nicht, nur das Argument
zu nennen.
In Unit 2, Scenario E, Aufgabe 4 (S. 53) sollen Sie erklären, warum Sie dieses Verfahren für sicher oder
bedenklich halten. Wenn Sie dort schreiben First of all, paying by smartphone is risky reicht dies auf keinen
Fall. Sie müssen risky erklären. Warum ist es risky?
Es ist gefährlich, weil dadurch Missbrauch erleichtert wird. Welche möglichen Formen von Missbrauch
kann es geben? Das Telefon kann gestohlen werden, die Daten können ausgespäht werden oder jemand
kann die Daten bewusst manipulieren. Nennen Sie diese Begründungen
Es kann vielleicht auch gefährlich sein, weil die Daten des Handynutzers gespeichert werden: Secondly,
all the data of the user could be stored. Es kann gespeichert werden, wo, wann und was der Handynutzer
‚gekauft hat. Der Konsument wird dadurch gläsern. Es können Profile der Menschen erstellt werden, die
vieles über die Person aussagen. Dieses Wissen könnte illegal genutzt werden.
Die eigene Meinung
Erst zum Schluss sollten Sie die eigene Meinung anführen. Diese müssen Sie mit neuen Argumenten
begründen.
Wenn Ihre Lehrkraft Ihnen einen anderen Aufbau beigebracht hat, halten Sie sich bitte an diese Vorgaben.
Generell soliten Sie Ihren Text klar und logisch strukturieren, damit der Leser / die Leserin den roten Faden
nicht verliert. Hierfür können Sie die Sprachelemente der hinteren Umschlagklappe dieses Buches nutzen.
Hier sind einige Beispiele, wie man mithilfe dieser Elemente einen Aufsatz strukturieren kann
‚Argumente gliedern
Eine Begründung anführen
Aspekte ergänzen
Einen Gegensatz ausdrücken
Beispiele anführen
Ein Fazit ziehen
Die eigene Meinung anführen
Im Prüfungsteil Geschaftskorrespondenz müssen Sie einen Brief nach deutschen Vorgaben schreiben.
Seien Sie sicher im Layout des Geschäftsbriefes.
Das Layout und alle Briefarten, die in der Abschlussarbeit vorkommen können, finden Sie mit vielen
Beispielen in Unit
4 (5. 88-137) in diesem Buch.
Lernen Sie die phrases in der im Lehrbuch vorgegebenen Reihenfolge.
Für die Prüfung brauchen Sie die phrases eigentlich nur vom Deutschen ins Englische zu lernen. Stellen Sie
trotzdem unbedingt sicher, dass Sie genau wissen, was die einzelnen phrases bedeuten. Ohne das Wissen
um die Bedeutung kann es Ihnen passieren, dass Sie in der Aufregung ganze Satzteile vergessen und so
eine lückenhafte Aufgabe abgeben, ohne dass es Ihnen auffällt, dass Ihre Sätze keinen Sinn machen. Eine

--- Seite 126 ---
SKILLS U
weitere Erleichterung ist, dass die phrases in der Reihenfolge abgefragt werden, wie sie im Buch angegeben
sind, denn so wird in der Regel ein Brief aufgebaut.
Beginnen Sie frühzeitig mit dem Lernen - eine Woche vor der Prüfung reicht nicht!
Um sich gut auf die Prüfung vorzubereiten, sollten Sie frühzeitig mit dem Lernen der phrases beginnen.
Es kommt beim Lernen darauf
an, wie Sie sich Sätze am besten einprägen können. Zur Überprüfung des
Gelernten verdecken sie die englische Seite der phrases und überprüfen die eigene Antwort, indem sie die
verdeckte Seite aufdecken. Auch wenn Sie zu einem solchen Lerntypus gehören, sollten Sie das ein oder
andere Mal diese phrases aufschreiben. Das hilft zusätzlich beim Einprägen und reduziert die Rechtschreib-
fehler in der Abschlussarbeit.
Eine andere Vorbereitung auf dieses Priifungsformat könnte für Sie das Schreiben der phrases auf unter-
schiedlich farbige Karteikarten sein. Jede Briefart sollte eine andere Farbe bekommen. So ist es für Sie
leichter, den phrases die richtige Briefart zuzuordnen. Auf die eine Seite schreiben Sie die deutschen
Vorgaben und auf die Rückseite den englischen Satz.
In der Mediationsaufgabe müssen Sie eine Übertragung vom Deutschen ins Englische vornehmen. Die Auf-
gabenstellung ergibt sich auch hier aus der Handlungssituation. Sie werden gefragt werden,
für jemanden
etwas in der Zielsprache zusammenzufassen, damit diese Person ein Thema besser verstehen kann.
Lesen Sie sich die Anweisungen sorgfältig durch. Stellen Sie sicher, dass Sie wissen
* _ warum die Informationen in einer anderen Sprache wiedergegeben werden, z.B. weil Ihr Kollegium
über Entwicklungen Ihres Tatigkeitsfeldes informiert werden sollen.
fiir wen die Mediation gedacht ist, z.B. für andere Schüler/innen, Ihr/e Chef/in.
+ _ welches Medium Sie nutzen sollen, z.B. eine E-Mail, eine Informationsbroschüre.
Bei der Mediation geht
es um eine Übertragung des Inhalts bzw. des Sinns der Textvorlage in eine andere
Sprache, und Sie agieren hierbei als Sprachmittler/in. Diese Übertragung soll keine Übersetzung
sein. Das
bedeutet, dass Sie sich in Grenzen von der Vorlage lösen können, um den Text ins Englische
zu übertragen.
In Grenzen heißt hierbei, dass der Ausgangstext natürlich noch erkennbar sein muss.
+ _ Prüfen Sie den Ausgangstext auf Wiederholungen oder sprachliche Mittel, die einem besseren Verständ-
nis oder der Verdeutlichung dienen, denn diese können Sie bei der Mediation unberücksichtigt lassen.
+ _ Verwenden Sie für den zu übertragenden Ausgangstext Wörter, die der Übersetzung ähnlich sind.
Suchen Sie nach alternativen Wörtern, die zwar inhaltlich dasselbe bedeuten, sich aber etwas von einer
direkten Übersetzung unterscheiden
Sie können die Sätze auch so übertragen, wie Sie sie in Ihren eigenen Worten schreiben würden (durch
Vereinfachung oder Kürzung), oder indem Sie von einigen Passagen nur die Kernaussagen in eigenen
Worten übertragen.
In Unit 3, Scenario B, Aufgabe 2 (5.73) z.B. lautet der erste Absatz des Textes wie folgt:
Das Abonnent-Preismodell ist ein besonderes und erfolgreiches Geschäft, das sich besonders für Software-
entwickler eignet. Dennoch gibt es einige Risiken zu beachten. Wie kann ein Unternehmen den Übergang
von einem All-In-One-Produkt-Modell zu einem Abo-Modell bewältigen?
Es gibt viele Möglichkeiten, diesen Ausgangstext zu übertragen, wie die folgenden zwei Beispiele zeigen:
Es ist ein gutes Geschäft, Kunden durch ein Abo-Vertrag an sich zu binden. Eine Umstellung kann aber riskant
sein. Wie kann man diese erfolgreich umsetzen?
Appendix
Eine Software nur einmal zu verkaufen, ist finanziell weniger günstig, als einen Kunden langfristig an sich
zu binden. Wie kann man eine solche Veränderung erfolgreich umsetzen?
Lesen Sie Ihren Text nach der Fertigstellung sorgfältig durch.
Überprüfen Sie Ihre Rechtsschreibung. Schlagen Sie das ein oder andere Wort im Lexikon nach.
Überprüfen Sie, ob Sie Ihren eigenen Text verstehen. Ist er schlüssig oder sind versehentlich Brüche
vorhanden, die Sie noch korrigieren müssen?
Schreiben Sie Sätze im Zweifel kürzer. Dann passieren Ihnen weniger Fehler, und es entsteht für den
Leser eine größere Klarheit.
Die große Schwierigkeit liegt hier dabei zu entscheiden, was inhaltlich relevant und übertragungsfähig
ist und was weggelassen werden kann. Bei der Bearbeitung der Aufgaben zu diesem Kompetenzbereich
sollten Sie aufmerksam sein, was Ihre Lehrkraft von Ihnen verlangt. An diesen Vorgaben sollten Sie sich
in der Abschlussprüfung orientieren.
ALLGEMEINE LERNTIPPS
Wenn Sie während des Lesens einem Wort begegnen, das Sie nicht kennen, sollten Sie sich fragen, ob es
notwendig ist, das Wort zu verstehen, um den Text zu verstehen und die Fragen zu beantworten. Wenn Sie
das Wort tatsächlich benötigen, versuchen Sie, bevor Sie nach dem Wörterbuch greifen (bzw. online nach
schlagen), die Bedeutung des Wortes selbst herauszufinden. Manchmal verstehen Sie die Bedeutung eines
Wortes, ohne es bewusst zu „kennen“. Wenn dem nicht so ist, nutzen Sie folgende Strategien
«Erarbeiten Sie es sich aus dem Zusammenhang heraus. Sehen Sie sich genau an, wie das Wort im Satz
benutzt wird und wie es mit dem Inhalt dieser Textstelle zusammenhängt.
Nutzen Sie Ihr Wissen über die deutsche Sprache. Viele englische Wörter haben ähnliche deutsche
Entsprechungen bzw. stammen sie von derselben Wurzel ab, z.B.: ten/zehn, light/Licht, night/Nacht,
biology/Biologie, democracy/Demokratie.
Bringen Sie mehr über Wortbildung in Erfahrung (wie man Wörter aus anderen Wörtern bilden kann)
Vorsilben (prefixes) können die Bedeutung eines Wortes verändern.
anti-
‘against
clockwise > anticlockwise
‘together’
operate > co-operate
inter
‘between’
national > international
sub-
‘under’ / ‘below’
standard > substandard
super-
‘above’ /‘over’
power -> superpower
trans
‘across’
form > transform
dis-
agree
disagree
correct > incorrect
‘not' / ‘opposite’
possible
> impossible
responsible -> irresponsible
Y/.- 8 TB BO %-
QQegeQqo:.

--- Seite 127 ---
SKILLS U
friendly > unfriendly
mis-
‘not correctly’
understand > misunderstand
‘again’
discover > rediscover
Nachsilben (Suffixes) können die Wortart eines Wortes verändern.
Nouns -> adjectives
Verbs -> nouns
Noun
Suffix
Adjective
Verb
Suffix
Noun
continent
continental
organize
-ation
organization
beauty
beautiful
express
expression
daily
bake
baker
hunger
hungry
begin
beginning
argue
ment
argument
Adjectives
> nouns
Verbs > adjectives
Adjective
Suffix | Noun
Verb
Suffix
Adjective
stupid
stupidity
advise
able
advisable
happy
-ness | happiness
rain
rainy
care
caring
Adjectives
> adverbs
Adjective
Suffix | adverb
awful
awfully
democratic
ally
democratically
Ein Wörterbuch ist ein hilfreiches Werkzeug. Es hilft Ihnen, einen Text zu verstehen und Ihr Vokabular
erweitern. Unabhängig von der Art des Wörterbuchs, das Sie nutzen - zwei- oder einsprachig -, ist
Folgendes
zu beachten:
Stellen Sie sicher, dass Ihr Wörterbuch aktuell ist. Sprachen entwickeln sich sehr schnell, also sehen Sie
im Impressum nach, ob es sich um eine „überarbeitete Auflage“ (updated version) handelt.
Lassen Sie bei Online-Wörterbüchern Vorsicht walten. Wörter haben in verschiedenen Zusammen-
hängen verschiedene Bedeutungen und Computer sind nicht schlau genug, um zu erfassen, welchen
Zusammenhang Sie brauchen.
+ _ Wählen Sie nicht die erstbeste Bedeutung aus, sondern lesen Sie alle Definitionen und überprüfen Sie
sie ein zweites Mal, indem Sie die neu gefundenen Wörter nachschlagen.
Stellen Sie sicher, dass Sie nach der richtigen Wortart suchen (Verb, Nomen, Adjektiv, Adverb).
Vergewissern Sie sich, den Aufbau einer Seite eines Wörterbuchs verstanden zu haben. Ganz oben auf
jeder Seite eines Wörterbuchs sehen Sie das erste Wort bzw. den ersten Satz sowie das letzte Wort bzw.
den letzten Satz, das/der auf dieser Seite ausgeführt wird. Solange Sie das Alphabet beherrschen,
werden Ihnen diese zwei Wörter helfen, das gesuchte Wort schnell zu finden.
TeEo%
Appendix
Bevor Sie mit Ihrem Wörterbuch zu arbeiten beginnen:
Lesen Sie die Inhaltsübersicht, um herauszufinden,
was Ihr Wörterbuch neben Definitionen noch alles
zu bieten hat. Lesen Sie die Nutzungshinweise sorgfältig durch - sie sind wichtig.
Sehen Sie sich die Liste der Abkürzungen und Symbole sowie die Legende zur Verbbildung an und
stellen Sie sicher, dass Sie deren Bedeutungen verstehen.
Vergewissern Sie sich, dass Sie über Grundkenntnisse der Grammatiktermini verfügen. Wenn Sie die
Bedeutung eines Adverbs nicht kennen, wird es Ihnen kaum helfen, ein Adverb nachzuschlagen.
Nutzen Sie ein Wörterbuch, um:
mit einem Text zu arbeiten. Wenn Sie nach Anwendung aller Ihrer Fertigkeiten unbekannte Wörter
immer noch nicht verstehen, schlagen Sie sie nach.
Ihr Vokabular
zu erweitern. Wenn Sie ein Ihnen unbekanntes
Wort nachschlagen, nehmen Sie sich die
Zeit, auch verwandte Wörter nachzuschlagen und eine Liste mit Wortfamilien anzulegen.
Idioms/Redensarten zu erlernen. In einer Redensart wird ein Wort in einem feststehen- den Satz ver-
wendet und ist seiner eigentlichen Bedeutung nur entfernt ähnlich, z.B.:„to get the wrong end
of the
stick“. Wenn Sie wissen, was „the wrong end“ und „stick“ bedeuten, verstehen Sie möglicherweise
immer noch nicht den vollständigen Satz (= etwas in den falschen Hals bekommen).
Sich während des Lesens Notizen zu machen ist sinnvoll. So können Sie sich die Informationen für später
besser merken.
Stellen Sie immer sicher, dass Sie den Text verstanden haben, bevor Sie sich Notizen machen.
Versehen Sie Ihren Notizzettel mit der Textüberschrift und der Quellenangabe. Die Quellenangabe ist
wichtig, wenn Sie in Ihrem Aufsatz u.ä. zitieren wollen. Auch kann es vorkommen, dass Sie zu einem
späteren Zeitpunkt auf den Originaltext zurückgreifen wollen.
Sehen Sie sich den Text genau an und suchen Sie sich die wichtigsten Unterthemen heraus, die Sie als
Überschriften benutzen können. Die Unterteilung des Textes in Absätze wird Ihnen dabei helfen.
Verteilen Sie diese Überschriften großzügig über das Blatt und lassen Sie unter jeder Überschrift Platz
für Notizen
thre Notizen bestehen aus Schlüsselwörtern, i.d.R. Nomen, Verben und Adjektiven. Konzentrieren Sie
sich auf diese Wortarten.
Halten Sie nach Signalen Ausschau, z.B. Wiederholungen, Wörter, die etwas unterstreichen,
oder an die
Leser direkt gestellte Fragen. Dies ist ein Anhaltspunkt, was der Autor / die Autorin als wichtig erachtet.
Sind Sie hiermit fertig, überprüfen Sie, ob Sie alle Informationen haben, die Sie benötigen. Sie können
durchaus über den gesamten Text verstreut sein.
+ _ Denken Sie immer daran, sich nur Notizen zu machen. Verschwenden Sie keine Zeit mit dem Abschrei-
ben ganzer Textabschnitte, lassen Sie unnötige Wörter wie Pronomen und Artikel weg und verwenden
Sie Abkürzungen und Symbole.
Zeichen
‚Abkürzungen
Wortverkürzungen
the same as
for example
govt | government
not the same as
kilometre
impt | important
w,, w/o | with, without
kids
children
and soon

--- Seite 128 ---
SKILLS U
Es ist schwierig, während des Zuhörens Notizen zu machen, weil die Aufzeichnung weiterläuft, während
Sie schreiben. Daher verpassen Sie möglicherweise wichtige Informationen. Bleiben Sie ruhig! Wenn Sie
es sich zur Gewohnheit machen, bei jedem Hören Stichpunkte aufzuschreiben, haben Sie bald den Bogen
heraus.
Bevor Sie zuhören:
Notieren Sie -wenn Sie die Zeit haben — Rubriken in Ihr Heft und schreiben Sie die Aufgabenstellung
ganz oben auf Ihr Blatt. Wenn Sie die Anzahl der Sprecher/innen kennen, legen Sie eine Tabelle mit
deren Namen an. Wenn Sie die Namen der Sprecher/ innen nicht kennen, schreiben Sie „Sprecher/in 1%
„Sprecher/in
2°, usw.
Während Sie zuhören:
Bleiben Sie bei der Aufgabenstellung und notieren Sie sich relevante Schlüsselwörter.
Nutzen Sie Abkürzungen, um Zeit zu sparen.
Nach dem Ende der Hörübung:
Ordnen Sie Ihre Notizen frühestmöglich. Wenn Sie sich hierfür zu lange Zeit lassen, können Sie sie
später möglicherweise nicht mehr deuten.
Wenn Sie in einer Prüfung Fragen zu einer Hörübung beantworten müssen:
Formulieren Sie mithilfe Ihrer Stichpunkte die wichtigsten Punkte aus.
Versuchen Sie, wenn Ihnen gewisse Details entgangen sind, die Antworten zu erraten, ausgehend von
dem, was Sie verstanden haben.
Einen Text zusammenzufassen bedeutet, ihn auf seine wesentlichen Informationen zu reduzieren. Sie
werden möglicherweise gefragt, einen Text zusammenzufassen, um zu zeigen, dass Sie ihn verstanden
haben. Bevor Sie beginnen
Stellen Sie sicher, dass Sie den Text verstehen.
Rezept
everstet
Lesen Sie die Anweisungen aufmerksam durch und vergewissern Sie sich, dass Sie wissen, welche
Informationen aus dem Text für den Leser
/ die Leserin wichtig sind. Sie können dies tun, indem Sie sich
Wh-Fragen stellen.
Machen Sie sich auf Schmierpapier stichpunktartige Notizen.
Sich
während des Lesens
Nun beginnen Sie, Ihre Zusammenfassung
zu schreiben.
Beschreiben Sie in ein oder zwei einleitenden Sätzen, wovon der Text handelt.
Lassen Sie alles Unnötige weg. Dies schließt Beispiele, ausführliche Listen, Namen, usw. ein
+ _ Verwenden Sie, soweit
es geht, Ihre eigenen Worte. Verwenden Sie Synonyme für Wörter
aus dem Text,
2.B. think- believe, und formulieren Sie um, z.B. recently - in recent years.
Versuchen Sie, Zitate in die indirekte Rede umzuwandeln, 2.B. The author states that
Appendix
Im Verlauf Ihrer Arbeit mit Ihrem Buch müssen Sie möglicherweise einen Text entsprechend besonderer
‚Anweisungen (Operatoren) verfassen
+ Wenn Sie sich beim Schreiben
auf den Text beziehen sollen, überfliegen Sie diesen, um sich einen
Überblick über den Inhalt zu verschaffen.
Lesen Sie sich die Aufgabenstellung durch. Diese beinhaltet eine der Anweisungen aus der u.s. Tabellen.
Es ist wichtig, dass Sie genau verstehen, was
Sie tun sollen.
Sammeln Sie Ideen, bevor Sie mit dem Schreiben beginnen
Stellen Sie sicher, dass Sie nicht dieselben Blickpunkte in unterschiedlichen Aufgaben wiederholen.
Markieren Sie Textstellen für unterschiedliche Aufgaben mit unterschiedlichen Farben.
Strukturieren Sie Ihre Antworten klar und logisch.
Verwenden Sie stets Ihre eigenen Worte, wenn Sie sich auf den Text beziehen. Suchen Sie Synonyme (z.B.
say - state) sowie Möglichkeiten, Sätze in anderen Worten auszudrücken (z.B, to a great extent -greatiy)
‚Anweisungen, die sich auf den Inhalt beziehen
In den folgenden Anweisungen lenken Sie Ihre Aufmerksamkeit auf die Hauptgedanken des Autors / der
‚Autorin.
Anweisung
Deutsch
Was Sie tun müssen
Summarize
zusammenfassen
Schreiben Sie die wichtigsten Textinhalte kurz
und prägnant auf, und verwenden Sie hierzu
Ihre eigenen Worte. Lassen Sie Ihre eigene
Meinung in Form von Beispielen weg,
Outline
darstellen
Beschreiben Sie die wichtigsten Tatsachen und
teilen Sie den Entwurf nach den wichtigsten
Unterpunkten auf.
Point out
aufzeigen
Beziehen Sie sich auf bestimmte wesentliche
Textinhalte, um deren Wichtigkeit aufzuzeigen.
Say what the text is
sagen, worum esim Text | Skizzieren Sie in eigenen Worten kurz den
about
geht
Inhalt. Dies ist keine Zusammenfassung!
Die folgenden Anweisungen werden häufig verwendet, um zu überprüfen, ob Sie den Text richtig ver-
standen haben.
Anweisung
Deutsch
Was Sie tun müssen
Describe
beschreiben
Geben Sie über eine Person oder Situation bzw.
einen Gegenstand Details wieder. Sie sollten
viele Adjektive benutzen.
Verlinken Sie Ideen und lassen Sie sie in der Reihenfolge, in der sie im Text erscheinen.
Define
bestimmen, umreißen, | Beschreiben Sie eine Situation, ein Problem, die
ech,
definieren
Bedeutung eines Begriffs usw. sehr genau.
Sie sich! Sie sollten in einer Zusammenfassung eines Textes nicht Ihre eigene Meinung
Say /State/
angeben sagen]
Erklären Sie, warum jemand etwas tat bzw.
Explain
erklären, warum
warum etwas geschah.
Wenn Sie fertig sind, überprüfen Sie Ihre Rechtschreibung und Grammatik.
Find evidence inthetext | Belege
im Text finden
für | Suchen Sie nach Tatsachen, die zeigen, dass
to show...
etwas wahr ist
aaRran=-

--- Seite 129 ---
SKILLS
Appendix
‚Anweisungen, um Standpunkte aus dem Text zu vergleichen und zu analysieren
Entsprechend der folgenden Anweisungen vergleichen Sie einzelne
im Text
angegebenen Aspekte.
Bevor Sie mit dem Schreiben beginnen, nehmen Sie Schmierpapier
zur Hand, sehen sich das Bild genau an
und machen sich Notizen zu den folgenden Fragen
Deutsch
Was Sie
sia)
sche
seien
+ Wer oder was spielt in dem Bild die Hauptrolle?
Compare
vergleichen
Heben Sie die Unterschiede und Ähnlichkeiten zwischen zwei
Steht ein Element im Mittelpunkt? Warum?
Sachen/Konzepten/usw. hervor.
Schafft das Bild eine besondere Atmosphäre, z.B. von Gefahr, Glück?
Contrast
gegeniiberstellen
Heben Sie die Unterschiede zwischen zwei Sachen/
Was ist die „Botschaft“ des Bildes?
Konzepten/usw. hervor.
‘Als Daumenregel sollte Ihre Antwort etwa zu zwei Dritteln aus einer Bildbeschreibung und zu einem Drittel
Point out
beschreiben
Stellen Sie objektiv
die Vor- und Nachteile von etwas dar,
aus einer Interpretation bestehen. Sagen Sie, welche Wirkung das Bild auf den Betrachter / die Betrachterin
wie sie im Text aufgeführt werden
hat. Folgende Ausdrücke können bei der Bildbeschreibung von Nutzen sein:
Beschreibung des Bildes
Entsprechend der folgenden Anweisungen erklären Sie die im Text ausgeführten Ansichten, lesen aber
auch „zwischen den Zeilen“ und erklären implizierte Bedeutungen.
‚Anweisung
Deutsch
Was Sie tun müssen
Analyse
analysieren
Beschreiben und erklaren Sie bestimmte
Describe and explain
beschreiben und erklären
Aspekte detailliert.
Examine
untersuchen
Interpretation der Bildaussage
‚Anweisung, den Text zu interpretieren und
je Aussage zu kommentieren bzw. zu diskutieren
Entsprechend der folgenden Anweisung erklären und bewerten Sie sowohl die genannten als auch die
implizierten Bedeutungen.
Anweisung
Deutsch
Was Sie tun müssen
Interpret
interpretieren
Erklären Sie die tiefere Bedeutung bzw.
Botschaft“ einer Aussage bzw. eines Konzepts,
usw. Verwenden Sie eigenes Hintergrund:
wissen und äußern Sie persönliche Ansichten.
Stellungnahme, Beschreibung der Wirkung auf den Betrachter
Entsprechend der folgenden Anweisungen sollen Sie objektiv sein und beide Seiten berücksichtigen.
Anweisung
Deutsch
Was Sie tun müssen
Discuss
erörtern
Wagen Sie beide Seiten einer Sache ab und
benennen Sie Für und Wider.
Entsprechend der folgenden Anweisungen sollen Sie Ihre eigene Meinung darlegen. Wenn Sie schreiben,
vertreten Sie Ihre Ansichten, doch erwähnen Sie auch Gegenargumente, um zu zeigen, dass Sie wissen,
wovon Sie sprechen.
Anweisung
Deutsch
Was Sie tun müssen
Assess
beurteilen
Fällen Sie nach reiflicher Überlegung ein Urteil
Evaluate
einschätzen, bewerten
über etwas und liefern Sie Nachweise, die Ihre
Meinung stützen.
Comment on
Stellung nehmen zu
QaQeaQqu

--- Seite 130 ---
SKILLS U
Die Vorschläge zur Vorbereitung auf eine Bildbeschreibung eignen sich auch zur Vorbereitung auf die
Beschreibung eines Cartoons.
Denken Sie jedoch immer daran, dass ein Cartoonist
/ eine Cartoonistin auf etwas Besonderes hinweisen
will. Die drei wichtigsten Techniken hierfür sind
Karikaturen, also ein oder mehrere körperliche Merkmale übertrieben darstellen.
Symbole, d.h. ein bekanntes Bild verwenden, um eine Idee zu transportieren, z.B. die Freiheitsstatue,
um die USA zu verkörpern.
Bildunterschriften bzw. Sprechblasen, die die Botschaft in wenigen Worten zusammenfassen bzw. den
Charakteren als Aussage zugedacht sind.
Bevor Sie über den Cartoon zu schreiben beginnen, stellen Sie sich folgende Fragen
Wie sind die Sachen/Personen/Charaktere gezeichnet? Sind die Personen als Karikaturen dargestellt?
Stellen sie einen bestimmten „Personentyp“
dar?
Sind Symbole vorhanden? Wenn ja, was repräsentieren sie?
Sind in der Zeichnung Nummern, Daten oder leicht erkennbare Orte zu sehen? Wenn
ja, welche Funk-
tion erfüllen sie? Was teilen sie uns mit?
Was ist der Standpunkt des Cartoonisten
/ der Cartoonistin zum ausgewählten Thema?
+ _ Welche Botschaft transportiert der Cartoon? Wie wird diese Botschaft vermittelt?
Sehen Sie sich alles auf dem Cartoon genau an und beschreiben Sie ihn ausführlich; verwenden Sie hier die
Verlaufsform der Gegenwart, um auszudrücken, was die Personen tun. Denken Sie daran, dass Sie, wenn
Sie die Botschaft des Cartoons nicht verstehen,
sagen können, dass es unclear
oder ambiguous ist.
Diagramme und Kurvenbilder werden verwendet, um Informationen visuell darzustellen.
Appendix
Bevor Sie mit dem Schreiben beginnen, nehmen Sie Schmierpapier zur Hand, sehen sich die Abbildung
genau an und machen sich zu folgenden Fragen Notizen:
Was sagt die Überschrift aus? Welche Beschriftung liegt vor?
Welche Zahlen und Einheiten werden verwendet, um die Daten darzustellen?
+ Wenn ein Balkendiagramm / eine Kurve vorliegt, wofür steht die x-Achse? Wofür
die y-Achse?
Welche Muster können Sie in den Daten erkennen?
Welche Schlüsse können Sie aus diesen Mustern ziehen?
Wie verhält sich die Abbildung
zu Dingen, die Sie bereits wissen, z.B. zu einem Text, den Sie kürzlich
gelesen haben, oder zu Informationen aus der Einleitung
zur Aufgabenstellung?
Um Ihre Beschreibung und Analyse der Abbildung
zu ordnen, nutzen Sie Ihre Notizen folgendermaßen:
eine Einleitung zum Diagramm bzw. Kurvenbild
(Überschrift)
ein Überblick dessen, was es darstellt
eine ausführliche Beschreibung der Informationen
die Beziehung zwischen den Kategorien
eine Auswertung des Diagramms bzw. Kurvenbilds
Hilfreiche Redewendungen, Schaubilder zu beschreiben, sind wie folgt:
Sprechen über Zahlen und Mengenangaben (values, amounts)
Sprechen über Proportionen (proportions, shares, percentages)
Pie chart
Table
Germany
Sprechen über Entwicklungen (developments)
und Tendenzen (tendencies)
Bar chart
Graph,
line graph
T2019 7 2020 T Year
T2019 T 2020 T Year
~ © J- eG

--- Seite 131 ---
SKILLS U
Sie werden möglicherweise im Unterricht bzw. als Teil einer Prüfung aufgefordert, an einer Diskussion bzw.
einem Rollenspiel mitzuwirken. Beide dieser Aufgaben schließen einen Austausch mit anderen Menschen
ein. Folgen Sie den u.s. allgemeinen Tipps.
Tipps für einen guten Austausch
Verinnerlichen Sie die Ausdrücke auf der hinteren Umschlaginnenseite und verwenden Sie sie im
Unterricht, sooft Sie können.
Halten Sie sich an das Thema.
lagsklap
«Bleiben Sie locker und denken Sie, bevor Sie sprechen.
+ _ Bleiben Sie immer höflich und geben Sie anderen die Möglichkeit zu reden. Hören Sie aktiv zu und
gehen Sie auf die anderen Teilnehmer/innen ein. Nehmen Sie Augenkontakt auf und zeigen Sie
Interesse, Überraschung, usw. Stellen Sie Fragen.
Hören Sie aufmerksam zu, was die anderen sagen.
+ _ Werten Sie andere niemals
ab. Wenn ein/e andere/r Teilnehmerin Probleme zu haben scheint, helfen
Sie ihm/ihr, indem Sie in Worte fassen, was (Sie glauben, was) er/sie ausdrücken möchte, z.B
An Diskussionen teilnehmen
In einer Diskussion sollten Sie Ihre Meinung zum Ausdruck bringen.
Lesen Sie die Anweisungen sorgfältig durch und entscheiden Sie, was Sie sagen möchten.
Machen Sie sich Notizen und schreiben Sie einige Schlüsselwörter bzw. -ausdrücke auf Englisch auf.
Versuchen Sie vorauszusehen, was die anderen Teilnehmer/innen sagen könnten. Überlegen Sie sich,
wie Sie hierzu reagieren würden, und fügen Sie Ihren Notizen englische Ausdrücke der Zustimmung
bzw. Widerrede hinzu.
Ein Rollenspiel gestalten
Ein Rollenspiel gibt die Situation und Rollen vor, die Sie spielen und erkunden.
Lesen Sie Ihre Rollenkarte sorgfältig durch. Ihre Rollenkarte
sagt Ihnen, wer Sie sind und was Sie
sagen sollen. Selbst wenn Sie nicht mit dem einverstanden sind, was Ihre Figur sagt bzw. wie sie sich
benimmt, „denken“ Sie sich in diese Rolle hinein.
Machen Sie sich Notizen zu den Argumenten,
die Ihre Figur sagen könnte, um ihren Standpunkt zu
vertreten.
GRAMMAR
1 go to meetings twice a week.
We live in Cologne.
Mr Brown teaches us English every day.
| don’t like conference calls.
Does Marion like travelling?
+ Man gebraucht das simple present für regelmäßige, sich wiederholende Ereignisse oder Handlungen
(1,3) und für Dauerzustände (2, 4,5).
Mit Ausnahme der 3. Person Singular (he, she, it) hat das simple present dieselbe Form wie der
Infinitiv (1,2).
Die 3. Person Singular endet auf -(e)s 3).
Ist kein Hilfsverb im Satz vorhanden, werden Verneinung und Fragen mit der entsprechenden Form
von to do gebildet (4,5).
Das simple present wird häufig mit den folgenden Zeitangaben benutzt:
I'm calling
to say that Ben's ill
He’s working from home today.
The computer isn't working.
‘Are you eating lunch?
+ Man benutzt das present progressive (auch present continuous genannt)
für Vorgänge oder Handlun-
gen, die im Moment des Sprechens oder Schreibens passieren und noch nicht abgeschlossen sind (1, 3,4)
Es wird auch für vorübergehende Situationen gebraucht (2)
Das present progressive wird mit dem Präsens von to be und der -ing-Form des Vollverbs gebildet.
Da beim present progressive immer ein Hilfsverb vorhanden ist, wird die Verneinung mit not/n’t
gebildet (3).
Fragen werden durch Umstellung gebildet (4)
Das present progressive wird oft mit den folgenden Zeitangaben benutzt
Diese Verben bilden normalerweise keine progre:
QaQeaQqu

--- Seite 132 ---
E-Book - Unterrichtsmanager - Focus on Bu:
GRAMMAR
We wanted to go to the USA last year.
2 She went on a business
trip to London.
3 Jasmin
not enjoy her work placement last summer.
4 Where did you go last year?
+ Man benutzt das simple past, um über Vergangenes zu berichten.
Das simple past wird auch gebraucht, wenn man sagen will, wann etwas geschehen ist (1,3,
Bei regelmaBigen Verben wird das simple past durch das Anhängen von -ed an den Infinitiv gebildet (1)
Die unregelmäßigen Verben haben eine Sonderform (2), die man auswendig lernen muss.
Ist kein Hilfsverb im Satz vorhanden, bildet man die Verneinung und Fragen mit did/didn't (3, 4).
Das simple past wird häufig mit den folgenden Zeitangaben benutzt:
The boss was talking to Heather during the presentation
The businessmen were exchanging business cards when a fire alarm (suddenly) rang,
! wasn't doing anything particular when he arrived.
Were you reading the sales report when | phoned?
pune
Wenn man ausdrücken möchte, dass eine Handlung zu einem bestimmten Zeitpunkt oder während
eines bestimmten Zeitraumes in der Vergangenheit im Gange war, benutzt man das past progressive
(auch past continuous genannt) (1)
Das past progressive wird auch benutzt, um zu verdeutlichen, dass eine Handlung im Gange war,
als ein neues Ereignis (plötzlich) eintrat (2-4)
Man bildet das past progressive mit was/were und der -ing-Form des Vollverbs (1).
Die Verneinung wird mit was not / wasn't bzw. were not / weren't gebildet (3).
Fragen bildet man durch Umstellung (4)
Einige Verben haben normalerweise keine progressive-Form (siehe present progressive, S. 227).
!’ve bought a new computer
| haven’t been to their new office yet.
How long have you had your new laptop?
We've had problems with internet access for the last two weeks.
She's had her own website since December.
wauna
Wenn man ausdrücken will, dass etwas geschehen ist, ohne dass der genaue Zeitpunkt
des Ereignisses
wichtig ist, wird das present perfect benutzt (1, 2)
Man gebraucht das present perfect auch, um zu sagen, seit wann oder wie lange ein Zustand oder eine
Handlung schon andauert (3-5). Dafür wird sehr
oft for bzw. since verwendet.
(Im Deutschen steht dafür „seit“ plus Gegenwart.)
ess .5th NRW
Appendix
Das present perfect wird mit have/has und der 3. Form des Vollverbs gebildet (1, 4 5).
Die unregelmäßigen Verben haben eine Sonderform (1,2), die man auswendig lernen muss
Die Verneinung wird durch das Einfügen von not/n’t nach have/has gebildet (2).
Fragen bildet man durch Umstellung (3).
Das present perfect wird oft mit den folgenden Zeitangaben benutzt
I've been learning English since | was ten.
They've not been working here very long.
Has he been planning the meeting for long?
Das present perfect progressive (auch present perfect continuous genannt) benutzt man für Hand-
lungen und Vorgänge, die in der Vergangenheit begonnen haben und zum Zeitpunkt des Sprechens
bzw. Schreibens noch nicht beendet sind.
Das present perfect progressive wird mit have/has been und der -ing-Form des Vollverbs gebildet (1).
Die Verneinung bildet man durch das Einfügen von not/n't unmittelbar nach have/has (2).
Fragen werden durch Umstellung gebildet (3)
Einige Verben haben normalerweise keine progressive-Form (siehe present progressive, S. 227).
The company couldn't deliver. They had had a fire at their factory.
Nina had already left the office by the time | arrived.
When | met John at the trade fair, he had been there all morning.
Mit Hilfe des past perfect drückt man aus, dass zwei Handlungen oder Vorgänge in der Vergangenheit
aufeinander folgten (1,2).Die Handlung,
die zeitlich voranging, steht im past perfect.
Das past perfect wird auch verwendet, um auszudrücken, dass ein Zustand vor einem Zeitpunkt der
Vergangenheit begann und zu diesem Zeitpunkt noch andauerte (3).
Wenn zwei oder mehrere kurze Handlungen in der Vergangenheit direkt aufeinander folgen, wird
für alle Handlungen das
simple past verwendet:
Rod had been preparing for his interview for three weeks when he got another job offer.
2 When | found Mary, | could see that she had been crying.
Das past perfect progressive (auch past perfect continuous genannt) wird verwendet, wenn man
ausdrücken will, dass eine Handlung oder ein Vorgang vor einem Zeitpunkt in der Vergangenheit
begonnen hatte und bis (oder fast bis) zu diesem Zeitpunkt andauerte.

--- Seite 133 ---
E-Book - Unterrichtsmanager - Focus on Bu:
GRAMMAR
will
In the future people will use public transport more often.
We can only hope that everyone will accept this change in attitude.
You've forgotten your laptop? Don't worry. I'll lend you mine.
Ms Smith will not be at the meeting this afternoon,
| won't come either.
Will one of these applicants
get the job?
Das will future benutzt man, um Vorhersagen zu machen (1) oder Vermutungen über die Zukunft
zu äußern (2). Man benutzt
es auch, wenn man sich spontan zu etwas entschließt, Angebote oder
Versprechen macht (3).
Das will future wird mit will
+ Infinitiv des Vollverbs gebildet. Es hat für alle Personen die gleiche
Form (1-3),
Die Verneinung bildet man durch das Einfügen von not unmittelbar nach will (4).
Im gesprochenen Englisch sagt man häufig won't (5).
Fragen werden durch Umstellung gebildet (6).
Das will future kommt häufig mit den folgenden einleitenden Verben und Ausdrücken vor.
going
Look at these sales figures. It’s going to be a very successful year!
This time I'm going to practise my presentation before | give it.
Tom isn’t going
to work for the company any more.
When are you going
to finish the report?
Das going to future benutzt man fiir Ereignisse und Situationen, die nach Meinung des Sprechers
bald eintreten werden (weil es bereits Anzeichen dafür gibt) (1)
Es wird auch für Pläne und Absichten gebraucht (2).
Das going to future wird mit am/is/are + going to + Infinitiv gebildet (1,2).
Die Verneinung bildet man durch das Einfügen von not/n’t unmittelbar nach am/is/are
Fragen werden durch Umstellung gebildet (4).
Der Gebrauch des Futurs hängt in gewissem Maße von der Absicht oder Sichtweise des Sprechers ab.
Dies gilt insbesondere für das going
to future und für zukünftige Ereignisse. Daher ist es im Zweifelsfall
ratsam, das neutralere will future zu benutzen.
The present progressive / The simple present
We're leaving the office at 1530.
The meeting starts at 4 o'clock.
Man kann das present progressive auch mit einer Zeitbestimmung der Zukunft (at 15.30, this afternoon,
on Sunday) für bereits feststehende Plane und Verabredungen verwenden (1)
Genau wie im Deutschen wird auch im Englischen das simple present mit einer Zeitangabe benutzt,
um fest terminierte Vorgänge (Fahrpläne, Stundenpläne, Programme usw.) anzugeben (2).
TeEo%
ess .5th NRW
Appendix
He can speak several languages.
You must accept your new situation.
We needn't go to work today.
| interrupt you?
+ Um zu sagen, was geschehen kann, muss, darf, soll usw, benutzt man ein modales Hilfsverb in
Verbindung mit einem Vollverb (1-4)
Im Englischen steht ein Hilfsverb — anders als im Deutschen - nie ohne Vollverb:
—Lena kann Spanisch.
NICHT: Lena-can Spanish
Modale Hilfsverben — nicht jedoch die Ersatzverben (siehe unten) - haben bei allen Personen immer
die gleiche Form, einschließlich der 3. Person Singular (keine -s-Endung) (1, 2).
Die Verneinung wird durch das Einfügen von not/n’t unmittelbar nach dem Hilfsverb gebildet (3).
Fragen bildet man durch Umstellung (4)
Abgesehen von could (wenn damit eine Fähigkeit ausgedrückt werden soll) kann man modale Hilfs-
verben nur im Präsens und — mit einer geeigneten Zeitangabe - mit zukünftiger Bedeutung benutzen
can go
(Präsens)
(Futur)
st writ
(Prasens)
must
writ
(Futur)
Um andere Zeitformen bei modalen Hilfsverben zu bilden, z.B. die Vergangenheit, muss ein geeignetes
Ersatzverb gebraucht werden;
can | couldn't start
(Fähigkeit)
weren't allowed to
(Erlaubnis)
Übersicht der modalen Hilfsverben nach Funktion
Funktion
Modale(s) Hilfsverb(en)
Fähigkeit
He can speak several languages.
The first satellites could
only transmit sound.
Möglichkeit
With your qualifications
you could work abroad.
The boss may come in at any moment.
might
ask you what you are doing.
Bitte
| have a word with Ms Sims, please?
(neutral)
Could I speak to Ms Sims, please?
(héflich)
| interrupt you?
(betont höflich)
Might I ask you a personal question?
(äußerst höflich)
Erlaubnis
You can go in now.
(neutral)
The boss is free. You
go in now.
(gefällig)
Verbot
be late for work tomorrow.
Pflicht
must wear
a hard hat in the factory.
Wahl
Most shop workers
nedn't work on Sundays.
Empfehlung
You should
get better qualifications.
(neutral)
You ought to get better qualifications.
(betont)
must get better qualifications.
(streng)

--- Seite 134 ---
GRAMMAR
Appendix
Die modalen Hilfsverben werden folgendermaßen verschoben:
Aussagesätze
Modalverb
Bedeutung
indirekte Rede
Some people claim that ‘servant’ robots are putting people out of work
Fähigkeit
could wis wer able 6s
2 The speaker reminded his audience
that there were some jobs robots couldn’t do
Erlaubnis
was/were allowed
+ Wenn man einem Dritten berichten möchte, was während eines Gespräches gesagt wurde,
benutzt man die indirekte Rede
may.
‚Möglichkeit
might
Bei Verwendung
der indirekten Rede benutzt man ein einleitendes
Verb wie claim, say,
Erlaubnis
was/were allowed to
remind, answer, think, mention usw., um zu verdeutlichen, dass eine Äußerung wiedergegeben
must
Pflicht
had to
wird
Steht das einleitende Verb in der Vergangenheit — also said, answered, mentioned usw. -,
mustn't
Verbot:
was/were not allowed to
dann verschieben sich die Zeiten wie folgt:
needn't
freie Wahl
did not / didn’t have to
direkte Rede
indirekte Rede
Außer wenn man über ein Gespräch berichtet,
das am selben Tag stattgefunden hat, müssen fast alle
Feen
Zeit- und einige Ortsangaben entsprechend der folgenden Tabelle geändert werden. (Angaben,
she Won hard
he wilted hard
nicht aufgeführt sind, bleiben unverändert.)
present progres
progress
direkte Rede
indirekte Rede
she is working hard
she was working hard
this
that
she worked hard
she had worked hard
these
those
reas
progressiv
at the moment
at that moment
She was working hard
She had been working hard
at this time
at that time
present
perfe
past
perfec
now, at present
then
she has worked hard
she had worked hard
here
there
she has been working hard
she had been working hard
today
onthat day,
(keine Verschiebung)
fomorrow
she had worked hard
yesterday
the day before
(keine Verschiebung)
the day after tomorrow
two days later
she had been working hard
the day before yesterday
two days before
next day/week/month/summer/.
the following day/week/month/summer/.
she will work hard
she would work hard
last Saturday/month/winter/.
the Saturday/month/winter/... before
she is going to work hard
she was going to work hard
two weeks/months/years/... ago
two weeks/months/years/... before
(keine Verschiebung)
she would work hard
Fragesitze
ould
have
t have et
(keine Verschiebung)
1 Amember
of the audience
asked what had led to the widespread use of robots in factories.
she would have worked hard
2 She wanted to know if/whether her job was endangered.
Bel indirekten Fragen unterscheidet man zwischen Fragen mit Fragewort (1) und Fragen ohne
Fragewort (2)
Bei Fragen mit Fragewort wird das Fragewort übernommen (1)
Bei Fragen ohne Fragewort benutzt man if bzw. whether (= ob), um zu verdeutlichen, dass es sich
um eine Frage handelt (2)
Alle anderen Änderungen erfolgen wie bei den Aussagesatzen (siehe S. 232).

--- Seite 135 ---
GRAMMAR
Appendix
Bitten, Aufforderungen und Befehle
Lucy asked the engineer
to show her the robot.
Measures are being introduced to reduce traffic pollution
He told her not to go too close to it
Pollution is caused by some thoughtless people.
Bitten werden meist durch asked (= bitten) (1), Aufforderungen und Befehle durch told (= sagen) (2)
Ist der Verursacher einer Handlung unbekannt oder zweitrangig, benutzt man das Passiv,
eingeleitet,
Im Vordergrund steht also das Ergebnis des Vorgangs (1).
Bei positiven Sätzen erscheint das Verb als to + Infinitiv (1)
Möchte man den Verursacher doch angeben, benutzt man einen by agent (2)
Bei negativen Sätzen wird not unmittelbar vor to gesetzt (2).
Der Verursacher wird mit by
- auf keinen Fall mit from- eingeleitet.
Die beiden Verben to tell und to ask stehen immer mit einem Objekt, das die angesprochene Person
Das Passiv wird mit einer Zeitform von to be und der 3. Form des Vollverbs gebildet:
erwähnt (1,2). Ist dies vom Kontext her nicht erkennbar, wird einfach ein passender Begriff eingesetzt
Zeit
Zeitform von to be
3. Form
simple present
amjis/are
caused
present progressive
amlis/are being
introduced
simple past
was/were
buried
Ifweinvest in new technology, a lot of people will lose their jobs.
past progressive
was/were being
built
2 Alot of people will lose their jobs if we invest in new technology.
If more people took part in re-training schemes, they wouldn’t have to worry about finding
present perfect
has/have been
installed
new employment.
will-Futur
will be
blocked
4 We won't stop global warming if we don’t start to redically reduce carbon emissions
qiteg orate
RER Pe
5 Will we stop global warming
if we start
to redically reduce carbon emissions?
Ein Konditionalsatz besteht aus zwei Teilen: dem if-Teil und dem Hauptteil
Beim Gebrauch von modalen Hilfsverben wird nach folgendem Muster verfahren:
Der if-Teil drückt eine Bedingung aus, der Hauptteil eine Folge.
bei Aussagen _ Hilfsverb + to be + 3. Form
must be displayed
Bei Konditionalsätzen kommen folgende Zeitmuster
am häufigsten vor:
bei Fragen
Hilfsverb+Subjekt+tobe+3.Form
Can...
be persuaded?
If+ simple present
wil-Futur
Das Verb to be bleibt
im Infinitiv immer unverändert
if + simple
past
would
+ Infinitiv
Typill
+ past perfect
would have + 3. Form des Verbs
Der ff-Teil kann hinter dem Hauptteil stehen. In diesem Fall steht kein Komma dazwischen
Max enjoys visiting his customers.
Je nach Sinn können der if-Teil, der Hauptteil oder beide Teile des Satzes verneint werden (3,4).
Can you afford to buy that new computer software?
Bei Fragen kann nur der Hauptteil zu einer Frage geformt werden. Dann steht dieser Teil an
3 Cem and Julie continued to meet even though they were no longer business partners.
erster Stelle (5).
4 Cem and Julie continued meeting even though they were no longer business partners.
like
offi
if-Satze werden gemäß der Wahrscheinlichkeit der zu erwartenden Folge eingesetzt:
Eau Doan
See meeting] EL SEE ludeyZ oe
i Deere
ev ZEEBEUZe
Nach einigen Verben folgt immer die -ing-Form (gerund) ().
Typ I: Folge (fast) sicher.
‘Am wichtigsten sind
D.h. viele Leute werden (vermutlich) ihre Stellen verlieren, da wir (sehr wahrscheinlich) in die neue
Technologie investieren werden.
Typ ll: Folge the
tisch
lich, aber k
ihrscheinlich.
Nach einigen Verben folgt immer der Infinitiv (infinitive) (2).
eatin
ichtigsten
Verben
dieser
D.h.esist kaum zu erwarten, dass viele Leute ihre Stellen verlieren werden, da wir (wahrscheinlich)
Zee pp 7
nicht in die neue Technologie investieren werden.
Typ lll: Folge unmöglich,
da die Bedingung nicht erfüllt wurde und bereits in der Vergangenheit liegt.
inves:
lost
Nach den Verben begin, continue, intend und start kann der Infi
oder die -ing-Form beliebig
D.h. der Sprecher weiß schon, dass keiner den Job verloren hat, da wir in die neue Technologie nicht
benutzt werden (3,4).
investiert haben.
QaQeaQqu

--- Seite 136 ---
GRAMMAR
Einige Verben werden
je nach Bedeutung entweder mit dem Infinitiv oder mit der -ing-Form benutzt.
Die wichtigsten Verben dieser Gruppe sind:
Wenn von einer allgemeingültigen Situation die Rede ist, folgt auf diese Verben die -ing-Form.
Handelt es sich aber um eine Ausnahmesituation, dann verwendet man den Infinitiv (5).
advise, allow, encourage, forbid, permit, recommend
Handelt es sich um einen konkreten Einzelfall, wird mit diesen Verben ein Objekt
+ Infinitiv verwendet,
Wenn es sich aber um eine allgemeine Situation handelt, dann steht das nachfolgende
Verb in der
-ing-Form.
forget/remember
Die Struktur forget/remember + -ing-Form bezieht sich auf die Vergangenheit. Sie drückt etwa
die Idee „Ich werde nie vergessen
...“ aus.
„Vergangenheit“ bezieht sich hier nicht auf forget/remember, sondern auf das nachfolgende Verb.
Die Struktur forget/remember + Infinitiv dagegen bezieht sich auf die Zukunft. Sie drückt etwa
die Idee aus „Ich darf nicht vergessen, etwas zu tun“ bzw. „Ich habe noch etwas zu tun, weil ich es
bis jetzt vergessen habe“.
regret
Die Struktur regret
+ -ing-Form drückt Bedauern über eine vergangene Situation bzw. einen
vergangenen Vorfall aus. Häufig geht es dabei um verpasste Chancen
Die Struktur regret
+ Infinitiv fast immer mit einem Verb des Mitteilens wie inform, say, tell
‚kombiniert — drückt eine schlechte Nachricht aus.
stop
Bedeutet stop „aufhören, etwas
zu tun’, steht das nachfolgende Verb in der -ing-Form.
Bedeutet stop aber
„kurz anhalten, um etwas anderes zu tun’, folgt ein Verb im Infinitiv.
Bedeutet try „etwas ausprobieren‘, steht das nachfolgende Verb in der -ing-Form.
+ _ Bedeutet try aber „sich anstrengen, etwas
zu tun‘, folgt ein Verb im Infi
Appendix
positions of adverbs of time, place and frequency
She stays in hotels every week.
The company is based in a small town outside
of Frankfurt.
Last year we went to an Italian restaurant for our department Christmas party.
Paul and Emily went
to the USA last year.
She always finishes work early on Fridays.
He is never in the office when I call
I like to work at home now and then.
Gina acted strangely
at the trade show last week.
evanawna
«Zeitangaben (Wann?) und Ortsangaben (Wo?, Wohin?) stehen in der Regel am Satzende (1, 2).
= Um die Zeit eines bestimmten Ereignisses hervorzuheben, kann man die Zeitangabe an die erste
Stelle setzen (3).
Stehen eine Zeitangabe und eine Ortsangabe zusammen am Satzende, dann gilt die Reihenfolge
Ort vor Zeit (alphabetisch merken: O vor ZI) (4).
Besteht eine Häufigkeitsangabe aus einem Wort, 2.B. always, often, sometimes, steht sie unmittelbar
vor dem Vollverb (5).
Lautet das Vollverb to be, steht das Adverb direkt dahinter (6).
+ Besteht
die Häufigkeitsangabe aus mehreren Wörtern, z.B. every day, now and then, steht sie wie
eine Zeitangabe am Satzende (7).
Adverbien der Art und Weise stehen in der Regel am Satzende. Kommen noch Zeit- oder Ortsadverbien
hinzu, lautet die Reihenfolge: Art und Weise - Ort — Zeit (AOZ) (8)
John has a new printer.
He always buys expensive equipment.
My computer has become very slow.
That CD sounds terrible.
We can make printouts quickly and cheaply.
+ Um Personen oder Sachen näher zu beschreiben, benutzt man Adjektive (1-4)
Adjektive stehen unmittelbar
vor Substantiven oder unmittelbar
nach einer Form von be (bzw. become
oder seem, die be ersetzen können) (3)
Adjektive können mit Verben wie feel, look (aussehen), sound, smell und taste eine sinnliche Wahr-
nehmung ausdrücken (4)
Umeinen
Tätigkeitsverb näher
zu beschreiben, setzt man ein Adverb
Verb + Objekt (5)
Im Englischen können ein Verb und sein Objekt
- anders als im Deutschen - nicht durch ein Adverb
getrennt werden. Also NICHT: We-can- make quickly printouts. (siehe Word order oben)
Adverbien werden auch benutzt, um Adjektive, andere Adverbien und ganze Sätze näher zu bestimmen
prisingly
cheap.
(Adverb + Adjektiv)
erribly
slowly. (Adverb + Adverb)
Luckily
(Satzadverb)
Die meisten Adverbien werden durch Anhängen von -ly an das Adjektiv gebildet (5). Eine kleine Anzahl
von Adverbien hat dieselbe Form wie Adjektive; die häufigsten sind fast, hard, early, late, long, daily.
telbar hinter
das Verb bzw.

--- Seite 137 ---
ausun-
GRAMMAR
Ahundred years ago life was slower and people may have been happier.
Which technological innovation is the most/least important?
Today you can copy data more easily than ever before.
Einsilbige und zweisilbige Adjektive, die auf -y enden - zum Beispiel easy, happy und lucky-,
werden mit -(ier/-(iJest gesteigert ().
Mehrsilbige Adjektive und Adverbien, die auf -ly enden, werden mit more/most gesteigert (2,3)
Die Adverbien, die dieselbe Form wie das entsprechende Adjektiv haben (fast, hard, early usw),
werden mit -er/-est gesteigert.
Um Personen oder Sachen im Satz miteinander zu vergleichen, gibt es folgende Möglichkeiten:
kein Unterschied
s good as
genau so gut wie
Unterschied
as good
nicht so gut wie
Unterschied
better
thai
besser als
Car manufacturers are designing cars which/that can use hydrogen fuel cells.
Wildernesses are being spoiled by tourists who/that want
to go to ‘unspoiled’ places.
Tony filled in a job satisfaction questionnaire (which/that) he found on the internet.
Fred Foley is a business tycoon whose fortune amounts to over €400 million
Call centre employees, many of whom come from India, work long hours.
Some non-GM crops are attacked by pests against which they have no resistance.
Relativsätze werden benutzt, um den Hauptsatz durch zusätzliche Informationen genauer zu bestimmen.
Für Sachen benutzt man das Relativpronomen which bzw. that (1) und für Personen who bzw. that (2).
Steht das Relativpronomen für das Objekt des Relativsatzes, dann kann man es weglassen (3).
Solche Relativsätze heißen contact clauses.
Um Besitz bzw. Zugehörigkeit anzuzeigen, gebraucht man whose unmittelbar vor dem Substantiv
bei Personen und Sachen (4).
Steht eine Präposition vor dem Relativpronomen, wird whom für Personen und which für Sachen
benutzt (5, 6). In solchen Fällen ist der Gebrauch von that nicht möglich.
The first people who bought our software were sole traders.
The company, which is famous
for its well-known logo, has its headquarters in New York
Im ersten Beispielsatz ist der Sinn des Hauptsatzes The first people were sole traders ohne den
Relativsatz who bought our software offensichtlich falsch bzw. unvollständig. Relativsätze dieser Art —
die wesentlich für das Verständnis des gesamten Satzes sind- nennt man defining relative clauses
(notwendige oder bestimmende Relativsatze).
Im zweiten Beispielsatz ist die Aussage des Hauptsatzes The company
has its headquarters in New York
ohne den Relativsatz völlig verständlich, weil der Relativsatz which is famous
for its well-known logo
eine zusätzliche, also nebensächliche, Information enthält. Daher werden solche Relativsätze
non-defining relative clauses (nicht notwendige oder nicht bestimmende Relativsätze) genannt
Notwendige Relativsätze werden immer ohne trennende Kommas benutzt. Dies signalisiert, dass
sie fester Bestandteil der Hauptaussage sind.
Sausun-
Appendix
Visit our website for more information on our firm.
NICHT informations
Have you read the paper today? The political news is interesting.
NICHT newsare
Where
can | get some advice?
NICHT an-advice
Einige wichtige Substantive sind zählbar im Deutschen, nicht jedoch im Englischen. Diese Substantive
können also nicht ohne weiteres mit dem unbestimmten Artikel a/an oder mit einem Zahlwort
benutzt werden.
Hier ist eine Liste solcher Wörter, die Sie auswendig lernen sollten:
Um diese Substantive im Plural zu verwenden, muss some, a bit of bzw. a piece of hinzugefügt
werden (3).
Some departments prefer
to hold regular weekly meetings.
They haven't got any women working in their company.
Have you got any information about arrival times?
Can | have some more coffee, please?
Would you like some mineral water?
There's something | need to do but | can't remember
what itis.
He can't find that letter anywhere. Maybe somebody took it.
Wir verwenden some in bejahten Aussagen (1) und any in verneinten Aussagen (2) und „echten“
Fragen (3).
Drückt die Frage eine höfliche Bitte (4) bzw. ein Angebot (5) aus, worauf eine positive Antwort
erwartet wird, verwenden wir ebenfalls some.
Wir verwenden die Zusammensetzungen von some and any
— also somebody/someone, something,
somewhere, anybody/anyone, anything und anywhere — in genau derselben Art und Weise (6-7),
Scientists say that global warming is increasing
The current
increase is caused by the greenhouse gases we produce.
Most reductions in carbon emissions are not enough
to stop
the trend
Nearly half the prisoners in British prisons are under 25.
Spring is my favourite season but the spring we're having this year is more like winter.
We had breakfast late this morning so we came to work by car instead of by bus.
They are attending a conference in the Netherlands.
Hat ein Substantiv eine allgemeine, uneingeschränkte Bedeutung
— also „alle ohne Ausnahme“ —
dann steht es ohne Artikel (1,5)
Ist die Bedeutung eines Substantives auf bestimmte Fälle eingeschränkt, benutzt man den Artikel
QaQeaQqu

--- Seite 138 ---
GRAMMAR
UNIT WORD LIST
Ferner wird der Artikel in den folgenden Fällen und Wendungen im Englischen — z.T. anders als im
Dieses Wörterverzeichnis enthält alle Wörter in Focus on Business 5% edition in der Reihenfolge
Deutschen
- nicht gebraucht:
ihres Auftretens. Wörter, die
in den Hörverständnisübungen vorkommen, sind mit einem
— bei most in der Bedeutung „die meisten” (3),
orangefarbenen Balken, und Wörter, die in den Partner files vorkommen, mit einem bläien Balken
— bei éffentlichen Gebäuden im allgemeinen Sinn (4),
gekennzeichnet.
— bei Mahlzeiten (6),
— bei Verkehrsmitteln (6),
— bei Straßennamen,
multinational company _ (international tätiger)
— bei Tageszeiten, Wochentagen, Monaten und Jahreszeiten im allgemeinen Sinn (5).
wees
Der Artikel wird verwendet nach all und half (4) und mit den Pluralnamen von Staaten (7).
to deal with sth
sich mit ah bataccen,
Der bestimmte Artikel steht im Englischen (viel) seltener als im Deutschen. Daher: When in doubt,
(did wid}
sich um etw kümmern,
pages
leave it out!
etw bearbeiten
work experience
Berufserfahrung,
complaint [kom'pleint]
Reklamation, Beschwerde
[wack ıksprorions]
Praktikum
filing [fail]
Ablage
tocome across sth
auf etw stoßen
toadvisesb[advaz]
jdnberaten
[kam a'kros]
Yesterday | met a woman who works for a friend of my father's.
onload be nl
Berufsschule
2 We'll have to buy a new computer.
education [edzu'keifn]
Ausbildung, Schulbildung
work placement [ws:k
Praktikum
That'san interestin
adviser [ad vaıza]
Berater/in
pleismant]
4 Jane's an accountant? | thought
she was a sales rep.
medium-sized company mittelständisches
internship [‘nts:nfip)
Praktikum
5_ My father has been
a non-smoker
all his life.
[mi:diom sarzd
Unternehmen
yet [jet]
schon (einmal)
6 How much does petrol costa litre?
ey Banane
togoaboutsth{geo _ etwangehen
7 We have planning meetings four times a month.
experience i’sporions] Erfahrunglen)
Der unbestimmten Artikel a/an steht bei einer einzelnen, nicht näher bestimmten Person (1),
page?
to matter [meta]
wichtig sein, darauf
to dislike sb/sth [dis'lark] _jdn/etw nicht mögen
ankommen
Anders als im Deutschen verwenden wir im Englischen den unbestimmten Artikel in folgenden Fallen
an wabhanglg selbstständig
8 fee on etw profitieren
— bei Berufsangaben (4),
company car[‘kampani
Firmenwagen
opportunity
Gelegenheit, Chance
— bei Angaben über Nationalität, Religion, Politik oder Gruppenzugehörigkeit (5)
kai]
Lopa'tjuznati)
— bei Maß- (6), Verpackungs-, und Zeitangaben (7)
tight [tart]
eng, knapp
to gain sth [geın]
etw erwerben, etwerlan:
~ bei den folgenden Wendungen;
deadline ['dedlamn]
Frist, Termin
gen, etw gewinnen
in Eile sein, es eilig haben
stressful 'stresf]
anstrengend, stressig
likely (atk)
wahrscheinlich
toachieve sth [aifiv] _ etwerreichen
toarrange sth
etw arrangieren, etw
ich baden duschen].
goal (goo!)
Ziel
Breinds]
vereinbaren, etw
to guess [ges]
vermuten, glauben
organisieren
es ausprobieren
team spirit
[fi:m spırit]
_Mannschaftsgeist
toreferto sth
etw bezeichnen, sich auf
an der Reihe sein, etwas zu tun
fulfilling
[fol film]
erfüllend, befriedigend
Inte]
etw beziehen
Lärm machen
besides that [bı,saıdz'xt] daneben, außerdem
voluntary [volantri]
freiwillig
Platz nehmen
passion pzjn]
Leidenschaft
tolast [la:st]
dauern
heine:
trip [trip]
Reise
taste [test]
Vorgeschmack
kan kurze Zeit
account [a'kaont]
Konto
particular (potıkjola] _ bestimmte/r/s
tocreatesth[kritet]
etw produzieren,
to apply for ajob
sich um/auf eine Stelle
mit lauter/ruhiger Stimme
etw erstellen
B.plaı for a dsob]
bewerben
NASE
to edit sth [edit]
etw (Film usw) schneiden,
case [kers]
Fall
ohne Pause
etw (Text usw.) redigie-
(job) opportunity
freie/offene Stelle
Bei half, quite, rather und such wird der unbestimmte Artikel nachgestellt:
to give sth up Lv np]
ewaigeen
to vertue ob
eine Stelle ausschreiben
to turn sth into sth
etw zu etw machen
[eedvatarz
a 'dzob]
(ta:n
inta]
tobe proactive
Eigenitiative zeigen
to specialize in sth
sich auf etw spezialisieren
[bi proo'ektiv]
['spefolarz m]
tomake use of sth
etw nutzen, sich etw
toearn sth [s:n]
etw verdienen
[meik juss av
zunutze machen
data security[‘deito
Datensicherheit
toapproach sb
an jdn herantreten, sich
sikjoarati]
[spraot{]
an jdn wenden
© 7-8 T#EBo%-

--- Seite 139 ---
UNIT WORD LIST
Appendix
apart from [s'pa:t fram] abgesehen
von, außer
page 10
tough [taf]
hart
economic
[i:ka'nomik]
wirtschaftlich
to experience sth
etwerleben
comment [koment]
Kommentar
reception [r'sepfn]
Empfang, Rezeption
relative to sth
bezogen auf etw, im
Lk'sprarians]
in myopinion[inmaı
meiner Ansicht/Meinung
to greet sb [grit]
‚jan begrüßen
[relativ ta]
Verhältnis
zu etw
first-hand [.&:st hend]
hautnah, direkt
a'pınian]
nach
tomanage
sth [menıdz] etw (Betrieb
usw.) führen
cost of living [kost av
 Lebenshaltungskosten
volunteering
ehrenamtliche Tätigkeit,
appointment
Termin
current [karant]
aktuell
[volan'trarm]
Freiwilligendienst
[e'pomtmant]
once [wans]
einmal
to cope [kaop]
zurechtkommen
insight
(into sth) [insart] Einblick(e) (in etw)
retail
['ristel]
Einzelhandel
general [dzenral]
allgemein
especially ['spefoli]
insbesondere
torecommend sb/sth _ jdn/etw empfehlen
retail assistant manager _stelivertretende/ Filial
[reka'mend]
Lritel
a sistant
leiter/in, Einzelhandels
page 12
page
volunteer|,volan'tia]__ehrenamtliche/r Mitarbei
‘maenidga]
kaufmann/-frau
whether [\weda]
mobility [maobılati]
Mobilität
ter/in, Freiwillige/r
HR (human resources) _ Personalabteilung,
sb enjoys sth[m'dzoz]
jdm gefällt etw
to increase [in'kr's]
zunehmen, steigen
scientific [saron'tsfik]
wissenschaftlich
Lettf‘a: (ajusman
Personalwesen
tocomplete sth
etw (Formular usw)
professional [pra'fefanl]
beruflich
research [r's2:t]
Forschung
n'so:si2)]
[kom'plist]
ausfüllen
development
Entwicklung
conservation
Schutz, Erhaltung
HRassistant [eitf'a:r
Personalsachbearbeiter/in
registration
Anmeldung
[d'velopmant]
[konso'verfn]
asıstant]
[red3i'streyfn]
employee [im'ploi]
 Arbeitnehmer/in,
reptile [reptail]
Reptil
customer adviser
Kundenberater/in
form [fo:m]
Formular
Angestellte/r
sea turtle [si t:t]
Meeresschildkröte
[kastamar advaıza]
to join sth [dsoin]
an etw teilnehmen,
totake up
a post
eine Stelle antreten
to volunteer
ehrenamtlich arbeiten,
to order
sth [o:da]
etw bestellen
zu etw kommen
[teik ‚apa poost]
[volan'tra]
sich ehrenamtlich
to post sth [paost]
etw (im Internet
/ per Aus
training course [tremm
Schulung
steady(-ily ‘stedi]
stetig, kontinuierlich
engagieren
hang) bekanntgeben
kos}
toenhance sth
etw stärken, etw verbes
refugee [refju'dgi:]
Flüchtling
to serve sb [s:v]
‚jdn bedienen
[m'hazns]
sern, etw fördern
migrant ['maigront]
Migrant/in
totransfer
a call
einen Anruf weiterleiten/
page 13
tointendto do sth
beabsichtigen/vorhaben,
support [sa'pa:t]
Hilfe, Unterstützung
[traens'f: a ko]
durchstellen
basically [beisıkli]
grundsätzlich
[intend ta du:]
etwzutun
community work
Gemeindearbeit
colleague [‘kolisg]
Kollege/-in
rule [rucl
Regel, Vorschrift
foreign assignment
Auslandseinsatz
[ko'mjunati ws:k]
administrative
administrativ, Verwaltungs:
tounderestimate
sb/ _ jdn/etw unterschätzen
[{foran a'sammant]
distribution
Verteilung
[ad'mmistrativ]}
sth [Andar'estimeit]
tothink about sth
sich etw überlegen, an etw
[distrr’bjusfn]
job opening
freie/offene Stelle
paperwork [‘peipaws:k]
Unterlagen
[eink abaot]
denken
event [i'vent]
Veranstaltung
[dzob sopnıy]
visa [via]
Visum
solution [sa'lu:fn]
Lösung
office supplies pl
Büromaterial, Bürobedarf
work permit
Arbeitserlaubnis
in terms
of [m tsımz av]
hinsichtlich, bezüglich
page 9
Tofis soplarz]
[work pamit]
protection (against sth)
Schutz (vor etw)
logistics [la'dsistiks]
Logistik
todisplay
sth [di'spler]
etw (Ware usw.) prasentie-
in advance
[in ad'va:ns}_im
Vorfeld, im Voraus
[pra'tekfn]
employer [im 'plora]
Arbeitgeber/in
ren, etw auslegen
national (nzjnal]
Staatsangehörige/r
to post sb abroad [‚paost jdn ins Ausland versetzen/
impressed[m'prest]
beeindruckt
Ismu:]
reibungslos, glatt
depending on
jenachdem
abro:d]
entsenden
possibility |posa’ılati]
Möglichkeit
‚Aufgabe, Zuständigkeit
[dr'pendig on]
secondment
(dienstliche) Entsendung,
to hire sb [‘hara]
jdn einstellen
[rxsponso'bulati]
qualification
(Berufs-)Abschluss
(sekandmant]
Versetzung
once [wans]
sobald
applicant 'eplikant]
Bewerber/in
[kwolfikeifn]
host [haost]
Gastgeber/in
to be keen on sth
sehr an etw interessiert
hiring status [haiormy
Stand des Bewerbungs
to recognize sth
etw anerkennen
temporary [temprari]
vorübergehend, befristet
[bi kin on]
sein
steitas]
verfahrens
[rekagnarz]
posting [paostın]
Versetzung
to assess sth [2'ses]
etw einschätzen,
jobseeker [‘dsob
si:ka] _ Arbeitssuchende/r
subsidiary
[sab'sidiari]
Niederlassung
etw beurteilen
pagel!
‘accommodation
Unterkunft
affiliated company
Tochterunternehmen
work ethic ['wa:k
e8ik]
Arbeitsethos, Arbeitsmoral
jobadvertfisement)
Stellenanzeige
[akoma'derfn]
[afiieitid ‘kampani]
to miss sth [mis]
etw versäumen,
[gob adva:t/
reasonable['ri:znabl]
angemessen
short-term[fot'tzım]
kurzfristig
etw verpassen
advs:tismant]
salary [‘selori]
Gehalt
contract [kontrekt}
Vertrag
toimpress sb [im'pres]
jdn beeindrucken
candidate [keendidat]
Bewerber/in
tosupport sb[sa'po:t]___jdn unterstützen,
‚employmentcontract
Arbeitsvertrag
typical [tıpıkl]
üblich, normal
toberesponsiblefor
 füretw zuständig/verant
jdm heifen
[im'plomant kontrekt]
item [aıtom]
Punkt
sth [bi n'sponsabl fa]
 wortlich sein
tosponsorsth[sponsa]
etw finanzieren,
tosuspendacontract
einen Vertrag aussetzen, ei-
to suggest sth [soldgest] _ etw vorschlagen
role [raol]
Funktion
etw unterstützen
[saspenda’kontrakt]
nen Vertrag ruhen lassen
understanding
Verständnis, Begriff
duty ['djusti]
Aufgabe, Pflicht
application process
Antragsverfahren
toterminate
a contract einen Vertrag aufheben/
[anda'steendin]
conference call
Telefonkonferenz
[epli'keifn praoses]
[simmeit a‘kontrakt] _ auflösen/kündigen
for a good cause
fiir einen guten Zweck
[konfarans ko:l]
to enter a country
in ein Land einreisen
toemploy sbim'plot]
jdn beschäftigen,
[fara ‚god
'ko:z]
to require
sth [rkwai]
etw erfordern, etw
Lentar a kantri]
jdn anstellen
toforcesbtodosth
jdn zwingen,
verlangen
to have sth in
mind
etw im Auge haben,
relationship [r'lesfnjip]
Verhältnis
etwzutun
to publish sth[[pablı]
etw veröffentlichen
[hav ın maid]
etw im Sinn haben
type [taıp]
attitude (towards sth) _ Einstellung
(zu etw)
to be glad
[bi ‘gleed]
froh sein, sich freuen
to consider
sth [kan'sıda] etw in Betracht ziehen,
arrangement
Vereinbarung, Uberein
[extitjucd]
to practise
sth [‘prektis] etw üben, etw praktizieren
etw berücksichtigen
[a'remdsmant]
kunft
to serve sth [ss]
etw servieren
aaRran=-

--- Seite 140 ---
UNIT WORD LIST
to recruit sb [r'krust]
assignment [2'sanmont]
page 15
to miss sb [mis]
challenge [tfeelinds]
page 16
to involve sth [in'volv]
basic [’bersik]
limited [‘umstid]
application [‚epli'keifn]
job title
[dob tart]
wholesale [‘haolseil]
recruiter [r'kru:ta]
per annum [par 'znam]
benefits
pi [‘bensfits]
(= reference
number) [ref]
buying [baun])
administration
(>dmın'streifn]
level (‘evl]
school leaving
certificate [sku
livin satfikat]
hours pl ['avaz)
permanent [jps:manant]
to join a company
[.dgom a 'kampani]
to provide sth
[pra'vard]
to carry sth out
[keri ‘aot]
to handle sth [‘heendl]
query [kwiari]
CV (curriculum vitae)
BE[si:'vi:, ka,rikjalam
‘vistal]
asap
(= as soon as
possible) (res et'pi:]
written [rıtn]
jdn einstellen, jdn
anwerben
Aufgabe, Auftrag
jdn vermissen
Herausforderung, (schwie-
rige) Aufgabe
etw mit sich bringen,
etw beinhalten,
etw umfassen
einfach, grundlegend
begrenzt, beschränkt
Bewerbung
Berufsbezeichnung,
Stellenbezeichnung
Großhandel
Unternehmen, das Mitarbei
ter anwirbt/einstelit
pro Jahr
Sozialleistungen,
Zusatzleistungen
Kennziffer
Einkauf
Verwaltung, Administration
Niveau, Stand
Schulabschluss
Arbeitszeiten
(Vertrag:) unbefristet
in ein Unternehmen ein-
treten,
zu einem Unter-
nehmen kommen
etw bereitstellen, etw zur
Verfügung stellen
etw ausführen,
etw durch
führen
etw bearbeiten,
sich um
etw kümmern
Rückfrage, Frage
Lebenslauf
baldmöglichst
schriftlich, in Schriftform
page 17
quality [kwolati]
requirement
[r’kwaramant]
missing (mısın]
outstanding
[aot'stendin]
working knowledge
Cwstkin 'nolıda]
word processing ['wa:d
pravsesin]
database [deitabeıs]
to be confident working
with sth [bi konfidant
ws:kın wid]
accuracy [‘ekjarasi]
attention to detail
[atenfn ta ‘dister!]
essential ['senf]
account [o'kaont]
overseas [,20va'si2]
to report
to sb [n'po:t ta]
account manager
[’’kaont menıdao]
to enter sth [’enta]
to manage sth [manıda]
to track sth [track]
sales order [seilz :da]
to issue sth [u]
sales report [‘silz pot]
to attend sth [a'tend)
request [rıkwest]
competitive
[kam'petativ]
condition [kan'dıfn]
discount [‘diskaont]
discounted [cis kaontid]
gym [sim]
opportunity
Lopo'junati]
sabbatical ['btıkl]
no matter (if) [,n20
‘mata]
administrative assistant
[edmmistrativ
a'sistant]
confident konfidant]
Eigenschaft
Anforderung
fehlend
außergewöhnlich,
herausragend
praktische Kenntnisse
Textverarbeitung
Datenbank
sicher im Umgang mit
etw sein
Genauigkeit
Detailgenauigkeit
wesentlich, unerlässlich
Kunde/Kundin
im Ausland, in Übersee
jdm unterstehen
Kundenbetreuer/in
etw (Daten usw.) eingeben
etw verwalten
etw verfolgen
Kundenauftrag, Verkaufs-
auftrag
etw ausfertigen,
etw herausgeben
Umsatzbericht, Verkaufs
zahlen
an etw teilnehmen
Anfrage, (Kunden-JWunsch
konkurrenzfähig, (finan:
ziel) attraktiv
Bedingung
Rabatt, Nachlass
vergüngstigt
Fitness-Studio
Möglichkeit
‚Auszeit, Freistellung,
Sabbatjahr
ganz egal (ob)
Bürokaufmann/-frau
selbstsicher, selbstbewusst
fast-paced [fasst peıst]
hard-working [‚ha:d.
"wackın]
in addition to sth
[um a'dıf ta
exciting [ik’saitry]
environment
[m'vaıranmant]
focus [Taokas]
diary [davori]
to schedule sth [Jedju:l]
bright [brait]
personable ['ps:snabl]
outgoing ['aotgaom]
social ['s2ol]
resilient [11'ziliant]
suitable [‘su:tabl]
verbal ['vs:bl]
to suit sb [su:t]
page 18
‘employment
[im'plomant]
typically [tıpikli]
professional [pra'fefanl]
annual leave [enjual
shift [ji]
termination [ts:mı'neifn]
pay [ped
compensation
[kompan'seyfn]
remuneration
[rymjunorein]
package ['pekids]
insurance [1n foarans]
health insurance
Chel@ mfoarans]
to focus on sth
[fookas on]
to state sth [steıt]
work schedule
(wa fedju:l]
duration [dju'rein]
to set sth out [,set 'aot]
time
off [taum of]
sick day (sik dei]
entitlement (to sth)
rasant, tempogeladen
fleißig
zusätzlich zu etw
spannend, faszinierend
Umfeld, Umgebung
Schwerpunkt
Terminkalender
etw (Termin usw.) ansetzen
intelligent, aufgeweckt
umgänglich, sympathisch
kontaktfreudig
gesellig
belastbar
geeignet
(Sprache:) mündlich
(zu) jdm passen
Anstellung, Arbeit
normalerweise, üblicher-
weise
Fachmann/-frau, (qualifi
ziert) Berufstätige/r
Jahresurlaub
Schicht
(Vertrags-JAuflösung,
Kündigung
Lohn, Gehalt
Entlohnung, Vergütung
Vergütung
Paket
Versicherung
Krankenversicherung
sich auf etw konzentrieren
etwangeben
Arbeitszeiten
Dauer
etw darlegen
Freizeit
Krankentag, Krankheitstag
Anspruch (auf etw)
hourly rate [avai ‘reit}
bonus [boonas]
incentive [ın'sentıv]
to obtain sth [ab'tein]
on top of sth [on ‘top av]
profit-sharing bonus
[profit fear ‘baonas]
to depend on sth
[a'pend on]
pension scheme/plan
[penfn ski:m/plen]
retirement plan
{r'taramant plen]
fully fli}
common [‘koman]
dental plan (dent! plen]
hospital plan ['hospıt!
plen]
to subsidize sth
[sabsidarz]
well-being [wel bin]
to attract sb [a'treekt]
in-house [in 'haos]
facility (fo sılati]
expenses pi [ik'spenstz]
relocation [‚i:loo’keıfn]
day care ['deı keo]
single parent [,singl
‘pearant]
page 19
gap year!
ep ja]
sales assistant ['seilz
asıstant]
final examination
fainl ıgzemı'neifn]
page 20
invitation [.mvıteifn]
sales [seılz]
job interview ['dsob
intayju:]
typing [‘taiprn]
dress code ['dres kovd]
vocational training
[vookeıfonl tremm]
Appendix
Stundensatz, Stundenlohn
Zulage
Leistungszulage
etw erhalten, etw
bekommen
zusätzlich zu etw
Gewinnbeteiligung
von etw abhängen
Altersvorsorge
‚Altersvorsorge, Alters:
teilzeit
vollständig
üblich, verbreitet, häufig
Zahnzusatzversicherung
Krankenhauszusatz-
versicherung
etw bezuschussen,
etw subventionieren
Wohlbefinden, Wohl
jdn anlocken, jdn anziehen
betriebsintern
Anlage, Einrichtung
‚Ausgaben, Kosten
Umzug
Kinderbetreuung
Alleinerziehende/r
freies Jahr zwischen
Schulabschluss und
Studienbeginn
Verkäufer/in, Vertriebs-
assistent/in
Abschlussprüfung
Einladung
Vertrieb,
Verkauffsabteilung)
Vorstellungsgespräch
Tippen, Maschineschreiben
Kleiderordnung
Berufsausbildung
agreement [a'gri:mant]
Vereinbarung,
enth
begeisterungsfahig,
Tn’taıtimant]
page 21
quantity[kwontati]
Menge
[un jwzizstik)
engagiert
party [pati]
(Vertrags-)Partei, Seite
fair [fea]
Messe
resale ['i:sel]
Weiterverkauf
manner [mena]
Art, Manieren
leaflet [flat]
Broschüre, Informations:
jobdescription[‘dsob
_Stellenbeschreibung
newly-established
neu gegründet
blatt
diskrıpfn]
Lnjuli 'stablt]
a aan 2.
T&EEBo %-

--- Seite 141 ---
UNIT WORD LIST
to tailor sth to sb/sth
[terla ta]
impression [ım'prefn]
to stand out from sth
[steend ‘aot fram]
resumé
AE [r'zju:m]
to leave
sth out
[li:v aot]
recruitment agency
[r’kructmant eıdzansi]
to add value to sth [,ed
‘vaelju: ta]
performing arts
[pa'fo:mun acts]
to check sth out
[tfek ‘aot]
covering letter [’kavarın
leta]
tool [tu:l]
to avoid sth [a'vord]
page 22
to develop sth [di'velap]
profitable [‘profitabl]
to develop [di'velop]
to deliver sth [di'liva]
interpersonal skills p!
[mta'pa:sanl skılz]
accurate [xkjarat]
exceptional [ik'sepfon]
goods
p! [god]
retailer [ri:teila]
order management
[o:da 'menidgmant]
issue [‘fu:]
equipment [kwıpmant]
to complete
an order
[kam plist an 'o:da]
to process sth [‘praoses]
supplier [so'plaro]
command (of sth)
[ka'ma:nd]
diving ['davin]
charity [tferati]
reference [refarans]
on request [on ri'kwest]
page 3
subject matter ['sabdsikt
meta]
vacancy ['verkansi]
etw auf jdn/etw zuschneiden
Eindruck
sich von etw abheben
Lebenslauf
etw weglassen
Personalvermittlung,
Personalagentur
einen wertvollen Beitrag
zu etw leisten,
etw aufwerten
darstellende Künste
sich etw (genauer) ansehen
Anschreiben, Begleit:
schreiben
Werkzeug, Instrument,
Programm
etw vermeiden
etw (weiterJentwickeln,
etw stärken
gewinnbringend
sich (weiter)entwickeln
etw liefern, etw bieten,
etw umsetzen
soziale Kompetenz
genau, akkurat
außergewöhnlich
Waren, Güter
Einzelhandler/in
Auftragsabwicklung
Problem, Frage
Geräte, Ausrüstung,
Ausstattung
eine Bestellung ausführen,
einen Auftrag abwickeln
etw bearbeiten
Lieferant/in, Zulieferer
Beherrschung (von etw)
Tauchen
Hilfsorganisation
Referenz
auf Anfrage
Gegenstand, Thema
offene/freie Stelle
entry-level posi
Lentri levi pa‘zifn]
to complete sth
[kam'plit]
commerce [koms:s]
to entitie sb to sth
[un'tartl ta]
commercial correspond-
ence [ka,msjl
kora'spondans]
valuable ['veejuabl]
to be confident that
[bi'konfidant dat]
permanently
(C'parmanantli)
well-suited [ wel'su:tid]
post [post]
to attach sth [ot]
at short notice [at fort
inaotis]
to welcome sth ['welkam]
Yours sincerely, Ljo:z
si'stali]
page 24
to enclose sth [in'klaoz]
with reference to
[wid ‘refrans ta]
particularly (pa'tikjalali]
suited ['su:tid]
tobe fluent in sth
[bi 'fluant n
previous experience
[pri:vias ık’spiorions]
at sb’s earliest conveni-
ence [at sambadiz.
s:ltst kan'vi:nians]
extensive [ık’stensiv]
to meet a deadline
[mist a ‘dedlam]
pressure [‘prefa]
to mention sth [menfn]
expression [ik'sprefn]
page 26
to be critical of sb
[bi 'krıtıkl av)
response [rı'spons]
careful(ly) (keafl]
thorough(ly) [8ara]
to convince sb [kan'vıns]
mock [mok]
to solve sth [solv]
Berufseinstieg, Stelle fur
Berufseinsteiger
etw abschließen, etw ab-
solvieren, etw beenden
Handel
‚jdn zu etw berechtigen
Handelskorrespondenz,
Geschaftskorrespondenz
wertvoll
sich sicher sein, dass
auf Dauer
(sehr) gut geeignet
Stelle, Posten
(Brief) etw beifügen,
(E-Mail:
etw anhängen
kurzfristig
etw begrüßen
Mit freundlichen Grüßen
(Brief:) etw beifügen
bezüglich, mit Bezug auf
besonders
geeignet
etw (Sprache) fließend
beherrschen
Vorkenntnisse, (bisherige)
Erfahrungen
sobald es jdm möglich ist
ausgedehnt, weitreichend,
reichlich
eine Frist einhalten
Druck
etw erwähnen, etw nennen
Ausdruck
jdn kritisch sehen
jdn kritisieren
Reaktion, Antwort
sorgfältig
gründlich
jdn überzeugen
Probe-, Übungs:
etw lösen
to support sth [sa'po:t]
to be familiar with sth
[bi fa'mılia wid]
recent [‘ri:snt]
instead of [in'sted av]
to contribute to sth
[kan'tribjuct ta]
former [fo:ma]
to criticize sb/sth
[kntisarz}
to engage with sb
Lun'gerds wid]
interviewer (ıntavjuo]
eye contact [aı kontakt]
to take action
Lteik ‘eekfn]
page
face to face [fers
ta fe1s]
recently ['rissnti]
to let
sb know [let 'nao]
pleasure [‘plesa]
instruction [in'strakfn]
to match closely [met
"Klaosli]
to be passionate about
sth [bi pefanat abaot]
enthusiasm
[im'@ju:zizezam]
to promote sth
[pra'maot]
reliable(-bly) [n'laiabl]
nervous ['n3:vas]
to deepen sb's
knowledge [,di:pan
sambadiz 'nolıd3]
to consist of sth
[kan'sist av]
brochure [braufo]
questionnaire
[kwestfo'neo]
external [ik'sta:nl]
agency ['erdsonsi]
market research
[_mackat n'sst{]
in-company
[im kampani]
to shadow sb [edau]
etw (Argument usw)
untermauern
mit etw vertraut sein, etw
(gut) kennen
jüngste/r/s, neueste/r/s,
aktuell
anstatt
zu etw beitragen, einen
Beitrag zu etw leisten
ehemalig
jdn/etw kritisieren
auf jdn eingehen, sich auf
jdn einlassen
jd, derein Vorstellungs:
gespräch führt
Blickkontakt
etw (Bestimmtes)
tun,
Maßnahmen ergreifen
persönlich
vor kurzem, neulich
jdm Bescheid sagen,
jdm etw sagen
Vergnügen
‚Anweisung, Anleitung
stark übereinstimmen
sich (leidenschaftlich) für
etw engagieren, sich für
etw begeistern
Begeisterungfähigkeit,
Enthusiasmus
etw fördern, etw voran;
bringen
zuverlässig
aufgeregt, nervös
jds Kenntnisse vertiefen
aus etw bestehen
Prospekt
Fragebogen
extern
Agentur
Marktforschung
betriebsintern
mit jdm (zu Schulungs-
zwecken) mitlaufen
page 28
to deal with sth
(dil wid]
business administration
"brznas admunustresfn}
ability (a'bilati)
page 30
‚smart [sma:t]
according
to [o'ko:dın ta]
hardly [hacdli]
potential [pa'ten{l]
to value sb/sth [velju:]
to appreciate sb/sth
[priest]
appealing [a'pi:lny]
authentic [o:Bentık]
premises
pl [premisız]
visible ['vizabl]
flexitime [leksitaim]
voucher ['vactfo]
transport conne
[treenspo:t kanekfn]
industrial park
[in dastrial'pack]
open-plan office
[aopanplen 'ofis]
to affect sth [o'fekt]
wording ['ws:din]
page 32
beanbag [bi:nbaeg]
preference ['prefrans]
to feel at ease [fi:l
at ‘i:z]
page 33
irregular [Vregjala]
Promotion [pro maufn
responsibility
[rı,sponsa’bılti]
childcare ['tfaldkea]
national holiday
[nafnal ‘holader]
edition [din]
community college AE
[ko'mju:nati kolıda]
in practice [in ‘praektis]
buyer [‘bara]
Appendix
mit etw umgehen, etw
bewältigen
Betriebswirtschaft
Fähigkeit
intelligent, schlau
zufolge, laut, gemäß
kaum
potenziell
jdn/etw (wert)schätzen
jdn/etw (wert)schätzen
ansprechend, attraktiv
unverfälscht, authentisch
Geschäftsräume,
Betriebsgelände
sichtbar
Gleitzeit
Gutschein
Verkehrsverbindung
Industriegebiet
Großraumbüro
sich auf etw auswirken,
etw beeinflussen
Formulierung(en)
Sitzsack
Vorliebe, Wahl
sich wohlfühlen
unregelmäßig,
ungewöhnlich
Beförderung
Verantwortung
Kinderbetreuung
gesetzlicher Feiertag
‘Ausgabe
zweijährige Berufsschule zur
Studienvorbereitung in
den USA
faktisch, in der Praxis
Einkäufer/in

--- Seite 142 ---
UNIT WORD LIST
apprentice [a'prentis]
day nursery [der nssari]
on average [on ‘evarids]
in theory [in ri]
it’s your turn
fits ja tan]
nationality [nafo'nelati]
occupation [,okju'perfn]
page 34
balance [’belans]
to be off balance [bi of
‘belans}
to draw [dro:]
spoke [spook]
score [sko:]
corresponding
[kon'spondin]
to join sth up [,d301n 'ap]
gap [gap]
plan of action [,plaen av
‘ekfn]
imbalance [m’belons]
balanced [‘belonst]
to devote sth to sb/sth
[dr'vaot ta]
toallocate sth to sth
Celakert]
page 35
appearance [a'piarans]
diet [daıat]
pet [pet]
to reduce sth by sth
{n'dju bat]
to the right extent
[ta da raıtık'stent]
page 36
to skim sth [skim]
cut [kat]
in particular [m patikjala]
to comment [‘koment]
page 37
decimal [‘desiml]
to balance sth [’beelans]
engineering
[end3i'niarin]
reputation [‚repjuteifn]
to take pride in sth [teık
'prand m]
Auszubildende/r
Kindertagesstätte
im Durchschnitt,
durch:
schnittlich
im Prinzip, theoretisch
Sie sind an der Reihe,
du bist dran
Staatsangehörigkeit
Beschäftigung, Beruf
Gleichgewicht, ausgegli
chenes Verhältnis
aus dem Gleichgewicht
sein
zeichnen
Speiche
Punktzahl
entsprechend
etw verbinden
Lücke
MaBnahmen(katalog),
Aktionsplan
Missverhältnis, Ungleich:
gewicht
ausgeglichen
etw jdm/etw widmen
etw einer Sache zuweisen,
etw für etw bereitstellen
‚Aussehen, Erscheinungsbild
Ernährung
Haustier
etw um etw reduzieren
im richtigen Maß/Umfang
etw (Text usw.) überfliegen
Kürzung, Senkung
insbesondere
sich äußern
Dezimalzahl, Dezimalstelle
etw ausgleichen, etw ins
Gleichgewicht bringen
Maschinenbau, Ingenieurs-
wesen
Ruf, Leumund
auf etw stolz sein, auf etw
großen Wert legen
| T#EEHo%-
sales representa
[seilz reprizentatiy]
sales target [sez ta:gıt]
wholesaler ['haulseıla]
to be proud of sth
[bi 'praod av]
spelling
['spelin]
page 38
parcel courier
[pasl koris]
depot ['dep20]
to load sth (up) [lood]
van [ven]
sign (of sth) [sam]
overtime [‘sovataim]
time off [taum of]
time account [taım
akaont]
totake
time off [tek
taum'of]
minimum wage
[mmmam 'weıda]
piecework [piiswsk]
sick
pay ‘sik pei]
medical insurance
[medikl m'foarans]
job security (sob
sikjoarat]
tofire
sb [faa]
notice [nootıs]
to be owned by sb
[bi ‘aond ba]
to belong
to sb [bilo ta]
fuel ['fucal]
to agree to do sth
[agri: ta'du:]
gross [oraus]
net [net]
self-employed [self
um'ploid]
dirt cheap
[ds:t ip]
deductions
pi [ai'dakfinz]
to own sth [son]
repair [ı'peo]
page 39
truth [tru:8]
to reveal sth [il]
giant [dzasant]
living wage [lıvin ‘weids]
major [meıdza]
Handelsvertreter/in
Umsatzziel, Verkaufsziel
Großhändler/in
auf etw stolz sein
Rechtschreibung
Paketbote/-in, Paket.
zusteller/in
Depot
etw beladen
Lieferwagen
‚Anzeichen (für etw), Spur
(von etw)
Überstunden
Urlaub, Freizeit
Zeitkonto
sich freinehmen
Mindestlohn
‚Akkordarbeit.
Krankengeld
Krankenversicherung
Arbeitsplatzgarantie
jdn entlassen,
jdn feuern
Kündigungsfrist
jdm gehören
jdm gehören
Benzin
sich bereit erklären,
etwzutun
brutto
netto
selbstständig
spottbillig
Abzüge
etw besitzen
Reparatur
Wahrheit
etw enthüllen, etw
aufdecken
Riese
Existenzminimum
groß, bedeutend,
wichtig
equivalent to sth
[kwvalant ta]
snapshot ['snepfot]
to introduce sth
Lantra'djus]
evidence [evidans]
to suggest sth
[so'dsest]
approximately
[a'proksimatl]
invoice ['invois]
to indicate sth (indikeit]
estimate ['estimat]
accounts p/{a'kaonts]
to calculate sth
[keelkjulest]
tax year [ts jta]
contribution
[kontribjufa]
calculation [,kaelkju'leyin}
to monitor sb/sth
[monita]
to drop [drop]
to dub sb sth [dab]
parental leave [pa rent!
ar insurance [ka:r
infoarons]
to be free to do sth
[bi ri: ta du
economy [konami]
to rely on sb/sth
[r'lat on]
contractor [kan'treekta]
to be subject to sth
[bi ‘sabdgekt ta]
core [kai]
page 40
freelancing [fri-la:nsin]
meaning ['mi:nin]
term [ts:m]
guarantee [,geron't:]
maintenance costs pl
['memtanans kosts]
page 41
head of department
[hed av di'pa:tmant]
organization chart
Lo:ganarzein Yazt]
einer Sache entsprechend
Momentaufnahme
etw einführen
Beweismaterial, Beleg(e)
etw nahelegen, auf etw
hindeuten
ungefähr, zirka
Rechnung
auf etw hindeuten
Schätzung
Belege, Buchhaltungs-
unterlagen
etw berechnen, etw errech
nen, etw kalkulieren
Steuerjahr, Veranlagungs
jahr
Beitrag
Berechnung
jdn/etw beobachten, jdn/
etw überwachen
sinken, fallen
jdn etw nennen
Elternzeit
Kfz-Versicherung
etw tun dürfen
Wirtschaft
auf jdn/etw angewiesen
sein
Dienstleister/in, Subunter.
nehmer/in
einer Sache unterworfen
sein, einer Sache unter-
liegen
Kern
Selbstständigkeit
Bedeutung
Begriff
Garantie
Betriebskosten
Abteilungsleiter/in
Organigramm
to interview sb [intavju:]
to promote sb [pra'maut]
to maintain [mein'teın]
to replace sth [r!'pleis]
production line
[pra'dakfn lam]
to invoice sb [invois]
cash flow [‘kefflao]
taxation [ta sein]
to draw sth up
dro: ‘ap]
balance sheet
(’beelans fit]
income ['inkam]
expenditure
[ik’spenditfa]
range [reinds]
turnover [ts:naova]
to manufacture sth
[ manju'fekt{o]
state of the art
[ stett avöi'at]
highly trained [,haili
'treind]
staff [sta:f]
just in time [,dgast in
taım]
to waste sth [weıst]
warehouse [weahaus]
warehouse space
[weahaos speis]
to work alongside sb
[wack a'lonsard]
to supervise sb
('su:pavarz
manufacturing engineer
[maenju'feektform
endginia]
to take turns to do sth
Lteik 'ta:nz
ta du:]
technician [tek'nıfn
immediate ['mi:diot]
page 42
managing director (MD)
[maenidsuy da'rekta]
product engineer
['prodakt endsinta]
purchasing ['p2:tfasin]
Appendix
mit jdm ein Vorstellungs
gespräch führen
jdn befördern
etw instandhalten,
etw warten
etw austauschen,
etw ersetzen
Fließband, Fertigungs-
straße, Produktions-
anlage
jdm eine Rechnung ausstel
len/ausfertigen
Geldfluss, Cashflow
Besteuerung, Steuern
etw erstellen,
etw ausarbeiten
Bilanz
Einnahmen
Ausgaben
Sortiment, Produktpalette,
Angebot
Umsatz
etw fertigen, etw herstellen
hochmodern
hochqualifiziert
Personal, Mitarbeiter pl
bedarfsgerecht, just in time
etw vergeuden
Lager
Lagerflache
mit jdm (zusammen)
arbeiten
jdn betreuen,
jdn anleiten
Fertigungsingenieur/in,
Produktionstechniker/in
etw abwechselnd tun
Techniker/in
unmittelbar
Geschäftsführer/in
Produktingenier/in
Einkauf

--- Seite 143 ---
UNIT WORD LIST
page 43
service ['ss:vis]
maintenance
[meintanans]
payroll clerk ['peirool
Klock]
accounting [a'kaontın]
accountant [a'kaontant]
bookkeeper [bukki:pa]
ine manager [laın
'maenudge]
supervisor ['su:pavaiza]
page 44
private limited company
(Utd) BE [,pravat
‚imıtid 'kampani]
parent company
[pearant 'kamponi]
public limited company
(ple) BE [,pablik ‚mitid
"kamponi]
company form [‘kampani
form]
sole trader BE [,saol
‘treida)
sole proprietor AE [,s2ol
pra'prarata]
limited liability company
(Uc) AE (Jimitid
lara’bilati kampani]
to invest [in'vest]
corporation (Corp./inc.)
AE (ko:pa'rerfn]
shareholder [eahoolda]
member
of the public
[_membar
av da 'pablık]
share [fea]
page 45
to bear sth [bea]
freedom ['frixdam]
to set up a company
[set apa'kampani]
to be involved
{bi m'volvd mm]
day-to-day running
(of a business) [der ta
det'ranm)
painting and decorating
[pemtin an ‘dekarestin]
to take charge of sth
[terk'tfards av]
Wartung
Instandhaltung,
Lohnbuchhalter/in
Bilanzbuchhaltung,
Rechnungswesen
(Bilanz-)Buchhalter/in
Buchhalter/in
direkte/r Vorgesetzte/r
Vorgesetzte/r, Ausbildungs-
leiter/in
Gesellschaft mit beschrank-
ter Haftung (GmbH)
Muttergesellschaft
Aktiengesellschaft (AG)
Gesellschaftsform
Einzelunternehmer/i,
Einzelunternehmen
Einzelunternehmer
Einzelunternehmen
Gesellschaft mit beschränk
ter Haftung (GmbH)
investieren
Aktiengesellschaft (AG)
Aktionär/in
(normale/r) Bürger/in
Aktie
etwtragen
Freiheit, Möglichkeit
eine Gesellschaft gründen
mit etw zutun haben
Tagesgeschäft
Malerarbeiten
sich um etw kümmern
bookkeeping [’bokki:pm]
trade [treid]
capital kapıtl]
faceless [feislas]
organization
[o:ganar'zey
page 46
globalization
[glaobalar'zeifn]
subsidiary [sab’sıdiari]
to restructure sth
Lrivstraktfo]
stage [steids]
century ['sentfari]
overland [‘sovalend]
silk [silk]
mainly [meinli]
sailing ship [ely fip]
explorer [ik'splo:ra]
colonizer [kolanaıze]
to establish sth
[i'steebh]
sea route ['si: ru:t]
trading company
['treidin kampani]
to restrict
sth [n'strikt]
to trade sth [treid]
brand [brand]
chain [tem]
to establish oneself
['staeblif wanself]
low-wage country
[lao weids kantri]
labour costs pl ['leiba
kosts]
standard practice
[stendad 'prektis]
huge [hju:ds]
to cover sth ‘kava]
massive [masıv]
advance [ad'va:ns]
computing [kom'pjutun]
to result in sth ('zalt m]
access (to sth) [‘ekses]
invention [in'venfn]
speed [spi:d]
telecommuting
[teliko mjuctın]
driverless [drawalas]
vehicle [vi:akl]
Buchhaltung
Handel
Kapital
anonym, gesichtslos
Unternehmen
Globalisierung
Tochtergesellschaft
etw umstrukturieren
Phase, Abschnitt
Jahrhundert
auf dem Landweg, über
land
Seide
hauptsächlich
Segelschiff
Entdecker/in, Forschungs:
reisende/r
Siedler/in, Kolonist/in
etw aufbauen,
etw.
erschließen
Seeweg
Handelsgesellschaft
etw beschränken,
einschränken
etw handeln
Marke
Kette
sich etablieren
Niedriglohnland
Lohnkosten, Arbeitslöhne
gängige Praxis
riesig, enorm
sich über etw erstrecken
riesig, Riesen-
Fortschritt
Informatik
zu etw führen
Zugang (zu etw), Zugriff
(aufetw)
Erfindung
Geschwindigkeit
Telearbeit
fahrerlos, führerlos.
Fahrzeug
page 47
robot [raobot]
domestic work
[da,mestık 'ws:k]
artificial intelligence (Al)
[actif] m'telidgons]
instantly ['nstantli]
telepresence
[tela'prezns]
eg.[i'dsi]
totransfer
[treens'fs: ta]
pricey [‘praisi]
to invent sth {in'vent]
to locate sb/sth
[lao'kert]
page 48
output ['aotpot]
to collapse [kaleps]
white-collar work
[watt koa wa]
speech recognition
(‘spit rekagnsfa]
teleroboti
[telarao'botiks]
surgery ['ss:dgari]
present [preznt]
to give the appearance
(of sth) Low di
2 prarans]
to operate on sb
'oparest]
delegate [deligst]
icy [asi]
page
to scan sth [skeen]
global trade [,glaobl
‘treid]
protectionist
[pra'tekjinist]
trade barrier
['treid beria]
to cross a border [kros
a'barda]
disruptive [dis'aptıv]
to compete with sb
[kam'pict wid]
to advance [ad'va:ns]
developing world
[di velapın ‘ws:ld]
to control sth [kan'traol]
Roboter
Hausarbeit
Künstliche Intelligenz (KI)
sofort
Telepräsenz
etw nach etw verlagern
kostspielig, teuer
etw erfinden
jdn/etw orten, jdn/etw
lokalisieren
Produktion
zusammenbrechen,
einbrechen
Büroarbeit
Spracherkennung
Telerobotik
Chirurgie
anwesend
den Anschein (von etw)
erwecken
jdn operieren
Delegierte/r
eisig, eiskalt
etw (Text usw) durch.
suchen, etw überfliegen
Welthandel
protektionistisch
Handelsschranke
eine Grenze überschreiten
beeinträchtigend
mit jdm konkurrieren
voranschreiten, Fortschritte
machen
Entwicklungsländer
etw steuern
coupled {kapld]
remotely [r'mootli]
to account for sth
(a'kaont fa]
computing power
{kam'pjustiy pava]
transmitting power
[trens mıtın pave]
security guard
[si'kjoarati ga:d]
leaner [kli:no]
to rise [raız]
to operate sth ['vparert]
to threaten sb/sth
retn]
to overcome sth
[aova'kam]
page 50
thanks to ['Beenks to}
to handle sth [hand]
to perform sth [pa'fo:m]
caption [kepfn]
speech bubble
[spit babl]
upper [apa]
bottom [‘botam]
left-hand [‘eftheend]
right-hand [‘raithend]
to make the point
that.
dat]
neık
da ‘point
pages!
to outsource sth
[aotso:s]
to boom [bu:m]
tobein great demand
m greit dı'maind]
to keep up with sth
[kip'ap wi]
demand (for sth)
[ci'ma:nd]
conventional
[kon'venfoni]
payroll [‘peiraol
to affect sb/sth [a'fekt]
early retirement (‚li
ritaramant]
Jump sum [,lamp'sam]
to guarantee sth
Appendix
gepaart, verbunden,
kombiniert
aus der Ferne
etw ausmachen
Rechenleistung
Sendeleistung
Sicherheitskraft
Reinigungskraft
aufsteigen
etw betreiben
jdn/etw bedrohen
etw bewältigen,
überwinden
dank
etw bewältigen,
verarbeiten
etw ausführen
Bildunterschrift
Sprechblase
obere/t/s
untere/r/s
linke/r/s
rechte/r/s
aussagen (wollen), dass
sagen (wollen), dass
etw auslagern
florieren, bomen
sehr gefragt sein
mit etw Schritt halten
Nachfrage (nach etw)
hergebracht, herkömmlich
Gehaltsabrechnung
jdn/etw betreffen
Vorruhestand
Pauschale
etw garantieren

--- Seite 144 ---
UNIT WORD LIST
page 52
software developer
{'softwea divelapa]
sixcfigure [siks figa]
auditing company
{‘ssditiy kampani]
seam [skem]
audit [o:dıt]
to suspect sth [sa'spekt]
security breach
{stkjoarati biz]
to request sb to do sth
{rvkwest]
operator [opareita]
to investigate sth
{mn'vestigert]
in order to do sth
Im’o:dato]
to accomplish sth
[kampf]
fairly eal)
standard 'standod]
to discover sth [di'skava]
workstation
[wsxk steifn]
investigation
{un vests gefn]
inoffensive [ma'fensiv]
authentication
{o;8ent'keifn}
third-party [02:4 'pati]
credentials pl [kradenjlz]
to appear [2'pia]
consulting [kon’saltin]
page 54
to be aware of sth
[bia'wear av]
carbon footprint
[ka:ban 'fotprint]
emission [i'mjn]
greenhouse [‘gri:nhaos}
plant [pla:nt]
to grow sth [grao]
to hit sth [hit]
solid solid]
surface ['ss:fis}
toenter sth [‘enta]
to escape [r'skeip]
to warm up [,wo:m np]
to surround sth
[so'raond]
vapour ['verpo]
nitrous oxide [naıtras
‘oksaid]
Software-Entwickler/in
sechsstellig
Wirtschaftsprüfungs
gesellschaft
Schwindel, Betrug
Prüfung
etw vermuten
Sicherheitslücke, Sicher
heitsverletzung
jdm bitten/auffordern,
etwzutun
Betreiber/in
etw untersuchen
um etwzutun
etw erreichen
ziemlich
normal, durchschnittlich
etw entdecken
Arbeitsplatz
Untersuchung, Ermitt
lung(en)
unauffällig
Authentifizierung
extern
Zugangsdaten
scheinen, den Anschein
erwecken
Unternehmensberatung
sich einer Sache bewusst
sein
CO;Bilanz, COz-Fuß-
abdruck
Ausstoß, Emission
Treibhaus, Gewächshaus
Pflanze
etw (Pflanzen usw.) anbauen
auf etw treffen
fest
Oberfläche
inetw gelangen
entweichen
sich erwärmen
etw umgeben
Dampf
Distickstoffoxid
fuel (Hull
to power sth ['pava]
to be trapped [bi'treept]
so-called [,sa0'ko:Id]
to consume sth
{kan'sjuzm
means of transport
[minz af 'treenspo:t]
lifestyle [lasfstaul]
page
drastic{ally) [drestik]
drought [draot]
polar ice cap [,paolar ‘ais
keep]
to melt [melt]
irreversible [‚rı'va:sabl]
inaction [in'ekjn}
to point sth out [point
‘aot]
to burn sth [bs:n]
water level [‘wo:ta levl]
to flood sth [flad]
overcrowded
[avva'kraodid]
petrol BE [‘petral]
engine [endzın]
page 56
coal [kool]
level [levi]
mode of transport
[maod av 'treenspo:t]
distance [dıstans]
load [laod]
volume ['volju:m]
harmful (to sth)
Cha:mfl]
page 57
seaside resort [si:said
to be concerned about
sth [bi kon'ssind
abaot]
round
trip [,raond 'trip]
North Rhine-Westphalia
[no:8 ram west ferlia]
coach [kaot{]
to give reasons for sth
[gry 'rizznz
value ['valju:]
column [‘kolam]
figure [figa]
label [‘leibl]
unit [junit]
Brennstoff
etw mit Energie versorgen
eingeschlossen
sein
sogenannt
etw verbrauchen
etw konsumieren
Beförderungsmittel
Lebensweise
drastisch, einschneidend
Dürre
Polarkappe
schmelzen, abschmelzen
unumkehrbar, irreversibel
Untätigkeit
etw darlegen, auf etw
hinweisen
etw verbrennen
Wasserspiegel
etw überschwemmen
überbevölkert, überfüllt
Benzin
Motor
Kohle
Gehalt, Anteil
Beförderungsart
Entfernung, Strecke
Ladung
Volumen
schädlich (für etw)
Badeort
sich über etw Gedanken
machen, sich wegen
etw Sorgen machen
Hin- und Rückfahrt
Reisebus
etw begründen
Wert
Säule
Zahl, Ziffer
Bezeichnung, Kennzeichnung
Einheit, Maßeinheit
page ss
view [vju]
speaker ['spi:ka]
unlike [,an'latk]
impressive {1m'preswv]
to be on fire [bi on fara]
to undo sth [an'du:]
to emit sth ['mıt]
chain reaction [‚feın
ritekfn]
beyond [bi'jond)
to survive [so'vaıv]
survival (sa'vaivl]
animal farming |‚enıml
“farmin)
to harm sb/sth [ha:m]
to turn up the heating
[ton ap da hit]
the human race
[83 hjuzman 'res]
to panic [panık]
percentage [pa sentidz]
page 59
to haul sb away [,ho:1
awe]
handcuffs pl Ühandkafs]
to bring sth toa
standstill [brin tu
a ‘stendstl]
strike [straik]
tohit the streets
da 'strists]
to goon strike [,ga0 on
‘strank]
to slam sb [slem]
to face sth [fers]
fine [fain]
truancy [‘tru:ansi]
to be divided over sth
[bi dr'vardid aova]
half-term [ha:fts:m]
amid [a'mid]
walkout [wo:kaot]
to hijack sth [hardseek]
to board a bus
[bo:da’bas]
to chant sth [tfa:nt]
to declare an emergency
[diklear an ı ma:dzansi]
Ansicht, Meinung
Redner/in
im Gegensatz zu
beeindruckend
in Flammen stehen
etw rückgängig machen
etw ausstoBen, etw
emittieren
Kettenreaktion
jenseits
überleben
Überleben
Tierhaltung
jdm/einer Sache schaden
die Heizung aufdrehen
die Menschheit
in Panik geraten
Anteil, Prozentsatz
jdn wegzerren
Handschellen
etw lahmlegen
Streik, Schlag,
auf die Straße gehen
in Streik treten, streiken
jdn heruntermachen,
jdn verunglimpfen
mit etw konfrontiert
werden
Geldstrafe
Schuleschwanzen, unent.
schuldigtes Fehlen
geteilter Meinung über
etwsein
Trimesterferien
inmitten
Ausstand, Arbeitsnieder-
legung
etw kapern, etw an sich
reißen
in einen Bus steigen
etw skandieren, etw rufen
einen Notstand ausrufen
totackle a problem
Ltekl a problam]
size [saız]
crisis, crises [kraisis,
raisi:z]
curriculum [ka'rıkjolam]
to back sth [beek]
rally [reli]
county council BE
[kaonti kaons!]
banner [‘beena]
page 62
to collect data [ka,lekt
deıta]
put simply [,pot 'simpli]
tangible assets pl
[teendsabl 'zsets]
intangible assets pl
[mtaendgabl sets]
patent [peitnt, ‘peetnt]
copyright [‘kopirart]
trademark [treid ma:k]
trade secret [t
machinery [m:
loss [Ins]
on time [on 'taim]
wage [werd]
supplies pl(sa'plaız]
raw material ro:
ma'tiarial]
cash [ka]
page 64
service ['s3:vis]
spending (on sth)
[spendin]
one out of ten [,wan
af ten]
in ten [,wan in ten]
pie chart ['pa:tfa:t}
footwear ['fotwea]
transport [‘treenspo:t}
personal care [,ps:sonl
‘kea]
to spend money on sth
[spend 'mani on]
to break sth down
[breik 'daon]
to make sth up
[meik’ap]
conscious [konfas]
Appendix
ein Problem angehen
Umfang, Größe
Krise, Krisen
Lehrplan
etw unterstützen
Versammlung
Grafschaftsrat
Transparent
Daten erheben, Daten
sammeln
vereinfacht gesagt
Sachanlagevermögen
immaterielle Vermögens:
werte
Patent
Urheberrecht
Warenzeichen
Betriebsgeheimnis
Maschinen
Verlust
pünktlich
Lohn
Versorgungsgüter
Rohstoff, Rohmaterial
liquide Mittel, Geld
Dienstleistung
‚Ausgaben (für etw)
jede/r/s zehnte, eine/r/s
vonzehn
jede/r/s zehnte, eine/r/s
vonzehn
Tortendiagramm
Schuhe
Verkehrsmittel, Verkehr
Körperpflege
Geld für etw ausgeben
etw aufschlüsseln, etw
aufgliedern
etw ausmachen
bewusst

--- Seite 145 ---
UNIT WORD LIST
Appendix
to compare with sb/sth
im Vergleich mit jdm/
money-offvoucher/
Rabattgutschein
tomeetaneed[mita _ einen Bedarf befriedigen
Lane]
[kam'pea wid]
etw dastehen
coupon [,mani ‘of
nid)
to purchase sth [‘ps:tfas]_etw kaufen
perception [pa'sepfn]
Wahrnehmung
vaotja/ku:pon]
hardware store
[‘ha:dwea Eisenwarenhandlung,
core product [ ko:
Hauptprodukt, Kernprodukt
tolast [last]
halten
loyalty scheme [‘oialti_ Bonus(karten)programm
stor]
Baumarkt
iprodakt]
to not be fair on sb/sth
_jdm/etw gegenüber nicht
skim]
to separate sb/sth from _jdn/etw von jdm/etw
monthly/annual fee
Monats-/Jahresgebiihr
[not bi fear on]
fair sein
to discount sth
etw (Preis usw) reduzieren
sb/sth separeit from]
trennen
[maneli/enjual fi]
to rank sth [reenk]
etweinstufen
[dis'kaont]
tobereadytodosth
 bereitsein, etw zu tun
loss (on sth) [los]
Verlust (bei etw)
cartoonist {ka:'tu:nist] _ Karikaturist/in, Zeichner/in
pricing ['prassın]
Preisgestaltung, Preisbil
(bi'reditadu]
ink [ink]
Tinte
dung
totell sth apart
etw voneinander
replacement
Ersatz, Austausch
page 65
subscription [sob'skripfn] Abonnement, Abo
[tel a'pa:t}
unterscheiden
[r'pleismant]
manufacturer
Hersteller/in
to spread to sth
etw erfassen, auf etw
to experiment
experimentieren
over the air [,aova
öi'ea]
kabellos, Funk
[_maenju'fektfara]
['spred ta]
übergreifen
[k'spermant]
added ['zedid]
zusätzlich
provider [pra'vaida]
Anbieter/in, Dienstleister/in
household goods p/
Haushaltswaren
customizable
individuell anpassbar
brand loyalty [brend
 Markentreue
to confuse sb/sth with _ jdn/etw mit jdm/etw
Chaoshaold god]
[kastamarzabl]
‘orati]
sb/sth [kon'fju:z wid]
verwechseln
to rent sth [rent]
etw mieten
module [modju:l]
Element, Modul
toremove sb/sth from _ jdn/etw von etw entfernen
roughly [‘rafl]
ungefahr
replenishment
‚Aufstockung, Nachschub
multiple ['maltrpl]
viele, vielfach
sth [r'muv fram]
tobeafactoflife[bia
zum Alltag gehören
[r’plenifmant]
costly [‘kostli]
kostspielig, teuer
tostrengthen sb/sth
_jdn/etw stärken
‚fackt av af)
supply [sa'plaı]
Lieferung, Vorrat
instead {in'sted]
stattdessen
['stren@n]
distinction (between
Unterschied, Unterschei
promise ['promis]
Versprechen
attempt [a'tempt]
Versuch
creature [‘kri:tfa]
Lebewesen
sth) [di'stinkfin]
dung (zwischen etw)
unboxing [an’boksin]
Auspacken
toturn to sth|'ts:n ta] _ sicheiner Sache zuwenden,
to identify sth
etw ermitteln, etw
tojudgesthldjad]]
 etwbeurteilen
zu etw übergehen
page 68
[a'dentfar]
bestimmen
to believe in sth
von etw überzeugt sein,
tobundle sth [‘bandl]
etw (Waren usw) im Paket
leading [lisdin]
führend
tosurveysb[’ssive]
jdn befragen
[bei m]
an etw glauben
anbieten, etw bündeln
analysis, analyses
Analyse, Analysen
nowadays ‘naoadeiz]
heutzutage, heute
loyalty ['oiati]
Treue, (Kunden-)Bindung,
to modify sth [modıfaı] _ etw abindern, etw verän-
[inalasis, aneelasi:z]
bricks-and-mortar store (konventionelles) Laden-
to stick with sth
bei etw bleiben, an etw
dern, etw modifizieren
art materials pl [a:t
Künstierbedarf
(briksan mattasto]
geschäft
[stk wid]
festhalten
meaningless [‘mi:nmlas]
_nichtssagend, sinnlos
matrarialz]
shopper [opa]
Kunde/Kundin
tobeloyaltosb/sth
jdm/einer Sache treu sein
gateway [geitwei]
Zugang, Einfallstor
tooperate['oparet]
geschäftlich
tätig sein
lever [‘kleva]
klug, intelligent
[bi ‘oval ta)
related [r'lertid]
verwandt, zugehörig
high street [hai strit] _ Haupteinkaufsstraße,
to blend sth [blend]
etw (miteinander)
counterpart [‘kaontapa:t] Pendant
strategic [stra'tixdsik]
strategisch
Innenstadt
vermischen
sustainability
Nachhaltigkeit
high-definition (‚han
hochauflösend
loyalty card [loroltika:d] Kundenkarte
tohamess sth [‘ha:mis]
etwnutzen
[sa.stema'bulati]
definifn]
general public [.dzenral
Öffentlichkeit,
assistance [o'sıstans]
Beratung, Hilfe
environmental impact Umweltbelastung
‘pablik]
Allgemeinheit
checkout [tfekaut]
Kasse
[im varran'ment!
page 67
writingmaterlalspl
Schreibwaren
to cut sb/sth out
jän/etw weglassen, jdn/
ımpakt]
tosign upforsth [san _ sich bei/zu etw anmelden
[raitiy ma'tiarialz]
[kat ‘aot]
etw (aus etw) heraus
manufacture
Herstellung, Fertigung
ap fa]
leather-bound[lede
in Leder gebunden
halten
[manju'fktja]
pre-installed
vorinstalliert
baond]
majority [ma'dzorati]
Mehrheit
packaging
[‘pekidsm]
Verpackung
[prism'sta:ld]
emphasis
['emfasis]
Schwerpunkt
to pick sb/sth up
jdn/etw abholen
organic [o:'genik]
Bio-
separate ['seprat]
separat
stationery (steijanri]
Schreibwaren, Papierwaren
Lpik'ap]
ownershipl’aonafıp]
Besitz
remote control [r,maot
Fernbedienung
to supply sth to sb
jdn mit etw versorgen,
campaign [kem'pem]
Kampagne
toaccesssth[iekses]
auf etw zugreifen
kan'traol]
[so'plai]
jdm etw liefern
to appeal [o'pi:l]
wirken, attraktiv sein
worry ['wari]
Sorge, Befürchtung, Ärger
toenteranage[entar
am Beginn eines Zeitalters
corporate company
Konzern, großes Unter-
to respond to sth
auf etw reagieren
broken [braokan]
kaputt, zerbrochen
an eidz]
stehen
[kocprat kampani]
nehmen
[n'spond ta]
belongings
pl [bi'lonmz]
Eigentum, Besitz(timer)
whether... or['weda2:]
ob... oder
branding [brandın]
Markenkennzeichnung,
to sth ['dju: ta]
aufgrund von etw
item [aıtam]
Gegenstand, Artikel
bedside
lamp [,bedsaid__
Nachttischlampe
Branding
glamorous [glemaras] _ glamourds
to dispose of sth
etw entsorgen
emp]
writing tool [raıtıy tu:l]
_Schreibgerät
celebrity [sa'lebroti]
Prominente/r
[ar'spaoz av]
refrigerator
Kühlschrank
tofound sth [faond]
 etwgründen
to trust sb/sth [trast]
 jdm/einer Sache vertrauen
e-waste ['i: weist]
Elektronikschrott
[r'fridgaresta]
todesigna software
eine Software entwickeln
endorsement
Unterstiitzung, Werbung
to provide an
die Gelegenheit bieten,
[di.zam a softwea]
Im'do:smant]
(durch Prominente)
page 66
opportunity to do
etwzutun
educationalorganiza-
_Bildungseinrichtung
review [n'yju:]
Rezension, Kritik
to lock sbin [Jok'mm]
jdn (Kunden usw)
an sich
sth [pravaid an
tion [edsukeyfonl
genuine [‘dsenjuin]
authentisch, echt
binden
po'tju:nati
ta du:]
:gonar'zeifn]
tobe willing todo sth _ bereit sein, etw
zu tun
tangible|‘tendsabl]
greifbar, materiell, konkret
ongoing ['pngaom]
fortdauernd, laufend
data hosting [‘deita
Datenhosting
[bi wm ta]
intangible [in'tendzabl]
immateriell
purchaser ['ps:tfasa]
Käufer/in
haostıp]
to take advantage
of sth etw (für sich) nutzen
services industry
Dienstleistungssektor
efforts pl'efats]
Bemühungen
corporate client [‚ko:prat Unternehmenskunde/
Lteik ad'va:ntids av]
['ss:vistz indastri]
loss leader['Ios lida]
_Lockvogelangebot, Zugarti
Klarant]
kundin
kel, Profilierungsartikel
aaRran=-

--- Seite 146 ---
UNIT WORD LIST
Appendix
torangefrom..to..
von..bis.. reichen
to transmit sth
etw übertragen
framework ['fremws:k]
Rahmen
steady ['stedi]
stabil, kontinuierlich,
(reında fram ta]
[traens'mit]
internal [in'ts:nl]
intern
regelmäßig
aircraft [eokra:ft]
Flugzeug
via [va]
über, per, mittels
to have an impact
on sth_ sich auf etw auswirken,
release [r'lis)
(Software-)Version,
qualitytesting[kwolati
 Qualitätsprüfung
antenna [en'tena]
Antenne
{hav an impekt on]
etw beeinflussen
Veröffentlichung
testin]
rectangle|'rektengl]
Rechteck
failure ['felja]
Misserfolg
continuously
ständig, andauernd
Pharmaceutical
pharmazeutisch, Pharma:
on/off button ['on/'nf _ Ein-/Ausschalter
solid [sold]
solide
{kan'tinjuasli]
{farma'suctikl]
batn]
customer
base ['kastama Stammkundschaft,
launch [lo:nt{]
Produktvorstellung,
facial recognition [feil
_Gesichtserkennung
to store sth [sto:]
etw (Daten usw) speichern
bers]
Kundenstamm
Markteinführung
rekag'nifn]
memory ['memari]
(Daten-)Speicher
tohavea reputation
 füretw bekannt sein
intheshort/longterm
_kurz-/langfristig
handwriting recognition Handschrifterkennung
to contain
sth [kon'tein]
etwenthalten
for sth [hav 2
d0 fo:t/ Jon 'ts:m
Uhzendraitıp rekagnıfn]
to transfer
sth [treens'f:] etw übertragen
repju'teifn fa]
changeover [tfeindgaova] Umstellung
tolink sth to sth
etw mit etw verbinden,
storage ['sto:rid3]
Speicher
obsolete [obsalit]
überholt, veraltet
Cink ta]
etw an etwanschließen
capacity [ka'pesati]
Kapazität
internet-enabled
internetfähig
page 74
equivalent ["kwıvalant]
Entsprechung, Äquivalent
[intanet meıbld]
failure [ela]
Scheitern, Bankrott
page 69
(rechargeable) battery
Akku
supply chain [so'plat
 Lieferkette, Versorgungs
death [dee]
advertising agency
Werbeagentur
[betari)
kette
to shrink [jrınk]
schrumpfen
[eedvatarzm erdgansi)
opening ['20pn]
Öffnung
to lack sth [leek]
etw nicht haben
failing [feili]
angeschlagen, schlecht
overview [‘sovavju:]
Überblick, Übersicht
toenablesb/sth
todo _ jdm/etw etw ermöglichen
existing [ig'zistin]
vorhanden, bestehend
laufend, schwindend
potential [pa'tenfl]
Potenzial
sth ['nexbl]
recommend:
Empfehlung
togo wrong [.gao'ron] _ schiefgehen, schieflaufen
crafted [‘kra:ftid]
handwerklich hergestellt,
dictation
devi
Diktiergerät
Lrekamen’deifn]
snake [sneık]
Schlange
handgemacht
Kaikteifn divans]
in favour of sth
für etw
era [ara]
blend [blend]
Mischung
lecture ['lektfa]
Vorlesung, Vortrag
[in'fewvar av]
rectangular [rektngjols] rechteckig
outstanding
auffallend
minutes p/mınıts]
Protokoll
efficiency ['ifnsi]
Effizienz
tolaunchsth[lo:ntj]
 etwauf
den Markt bringen,
[aot'steendin]
torun out of power
keinen Strom mehr haben
tostate one’s opinion _ seine Meinung äußern
etw einführen
feature [fitfa]
Eigenschaft
[ran aot af'pava]
[steıt wanza'pınian]
tofailtodosth[fel
_esversäumen, etw zutun
cloud storage |‘klaod
 Datenspeicherung
in der
continuous {kan'tmjuas]
ununterbrochen, durch
ta du:]
starrdg]
Cloud
gehend
page 72
failure [felja]
Versagen, Versäumnis
specs pl[speks]
technische Daten
tochargesth[tfa:ds]
etw (auf)laden
business model [bıznas
Geschäftsmodell
to become more
schneller/besser
auf etw
to count on sth
auf etw setzen, auf etw
to plug sth into sth
etw in etw stecken
modi]
responsive
reagieren können
(kaont on]
bauen
Eplagınta]
tax accountant (‘teks
Steuerberater/in
[by kam mo: rı'sponsıv
similarity [sıma’lerati]
Ähnlichkeit
socket [sokıt]
Buchse, Steckdose
akaontant]
body [’bodi]
Schaft
private consumer
private/r Abnehmer/in
product life cycle
Produktlebenszyklus
solid ['solıd]
massiv
page 70
[,praivat
kan'sju:ma]
[prodakt ‘laif saıkl]
gram [grem]
Gramm
competitor [kam'petita]
Konkurrent/in, Wett
to consider
sth [kan'sıda] über etw nachdenken
workforce[wskfoss]
Belegschaft
to weigh [wer]
wiegen
bewerber/in
business consultant
_Unternehmensberater/in
lack (of sth) [lek]
Mangel (an etw), Fehlen
gorgeous ’go:dzos]
(wunder)schön
versatile (va:sotail]
vielseitig (verwendbar)
(brznas kansaltant]
(von etw)
stainless
steel [stemlas
Edelstahl
battery life ‘betta
aif] Akkulaufzeit
one-time payment
Einmalzahlung
senior [‘si:nia]
leitend, ranghoch
‘stil]
reliability [ryJaia'biloti]
Zuverlässigkeit
[wan tam ‘pemant]
to come asa shock for sb ein Schock
fir jd sein, jdn
casing [keisın]
Gehäuse
versatility [v2:sa'tilati]
Vielseitigkeit
to switch to sth
auf etw umstellen/
[kam aza 'fok fa]
schockieren
amazing [2'merain]
großartig, unglaublich
text capture [tekst
Texterfassung
('swtfta]
umsteigen
tobreak sth up [[breik _ etw (Team usw) auflösen
component
Bauteil, Element
keptfa]
fee [fit]
Beitrag, Gebühr
[kam'paonant]
performance [pa'fo:mans} Leistung
affordable[sfo:dabl]
erschwinglich
experienced
erfahren
to point sth out [pamt
auf etw hinweisen,
auf etw
step [step]
Schritt, Abschnitt, Phase
towork out [waik'aot]
laufen, sich entwickeln
Lk’sprarionst]
‘aot]
aufmerksam machen
process [‘praoses]
Verfahren, Ablauf, Prozess
toturn into sth
zu etw werden
tobecome demotivated die Motivation verlieren
ink refil (ink risfil]
Tintenpatrone
to synchronize
synchronisieren
(ton ta]
[by kam di'maotrvertid])
[rub]
Schreibfeder
[sinkranarz]
vampire ['vempata]
Vampir
torobsbofsth['robav] jdm etw nehmen
projector [pra'dsekta]
Beamer, Projektor
toprocesssth[prauses]
_etw verarbeiten
to suck [sak]
saugen
asset [eset]
Aktivposten, Pluspunkt
invisible
(to sb/sth)
unsichtbar (für jdn/etw)
toconvert
sth [kan'v:t]
etw umwandeln
tospreadsthoutover
etw über etw verteilen
brains pl[breinz]
Grips, Verstand
[in'vizabl]
tobe involved
an etw beteiligt sein
[ spred ‘aot aova]
creative spark (kri.itiv _schöpferischer Funke,
topatent sth['peitnt,
_etw patentieren
[bi m'volvd mn]
tocancel sth 'keensl]
 etwkündigen
‘spack]
Kreativität
‘petnt]
delivery (ofaservice)
Erbringung
(einer Dienst
decrease
(in sth)
Rückgang, Abnahme
tostruggleon[stragl _ weiterkämpfen, weiter
to reflect (off sth)
(von etw) reflektiert
[arivari]
leistung)
[a'kriss]
(von etw)
machen
[r’flekt]
werden
revenue [‘revanju:]
Einnahmen, Einkünfte
to become unfashionable aus der Mode kommen
as you write
[oz ju: 'raıt]
beim Schreiben
page7!
profit [‘profit]
Gewinn
[bıkam an'fefnabl]
to capture
sth ‘keeptfa]
etw erfassen, etw auf-
threat (to sb/sth) [Qret]
Bedrohung (fürjdn/etw)
producer [pradju:ss]
 Hersteller/in, Produzent/in
loss {los}
Verlust
nehmen
Risiko (für jdn/etw)
developer[d'velapa]
_Entwickler/in
weak [wi:k]
schwach
aaRran=-

--- Seite 147 ---
UNIT WORD LIST
shadow ['feedao]
Schatten
to disappear [disa'pts] _ verschwinden
to appear [a'pıa]
erscheinen, auftauchen
tore-enterthemarket
wieder in den Markt
[ryenta da ‘ma:kit]
einsteigen
page 75
marketing
mix ["ma:kitiy Marketing-Mix
muks)
waterfall [‘wo:tafo:l]
Wasserfall
approach [a'practj]
Ansatz, Methode, Modell
consecutive
aufeinander folgend,
[kan'sekjativ]
fortlaufend
band [bend]
Streifen
time scale ['tarm skeil] _ zeitlicher Rahmen
not... until [notan'tıl]
erstwenn
construction [kan'strakfn] Konstruktion
assembly [o'sembli]
Montage
to document sth
etw dokumentieren
[dokjumant]
concept ['konsept]
Konzept, Idee
manufacturing industry verarbeitende Industrie
[_maenju'fektfarm
ındastri]
state of the art [‚steit av
auf neuestem technischem
Sat]
Stand
strict
[strikt]
streng
hierarchy[hararaski]
Rangfolge, Hierarchie
to consult with sb
sich mit jdm beraten, mit
[kan 'salt wid]
jdm sprechen
target [ta:gıt]
Ziel
deadline [‘dedlain]
Frist
to measure
sth 'mez]]
etw messen
to evaluate
etw bewerten, etw
[iveeljuert]
auswerten
drawback ‘dro:bek]
Nachteil
delay [drei]
Verzögerung
evaluation [1veljueifn]
Bewertung, Auswertung
to delay sth [di'le:]
etw verzögern
page 76
agile ['xdsail]
agil
methodology
Methodik
[meta doladsil
sign-off [sain of]
(Projekt-)Abnahme,
Abschluss
cross-functional
funktionsübergreifend,
[kros fankfonl]
bereichsübergreifend
stakeholder
Projektbeteiligte/r
('steıkhaulde]
Arabic [‘erabik]
Arabisch
to recognize sth
etwerkennen
[rekagnaız]
backlog ['beklog]
Rückstand
to integrate sth
etw einbinden, etw
Eintigreit]
integrieren
to cancel sth [kensl]
to roll sth out [‚raol 'aot]
iteration itareifn]
viable ['vaiabl]
minimum viable
product (MVP)
[minımam vaiabl
prodakt]
iterative [ıtrativ]
to tap sth [tp]
to release sth [rls]
to fix sth [fiks]
to sign sth off [sain of]
coach [kaotf]
formality [fo:'meelati]
alert [alt]
to stick to sth ['stik ta]
page 77
to activate sth 'ektivest]
abbreviati
[abrisvierfn]
page 78
indicator (of sth)
[indikerta]
to destroy sth [d'stroi
to cover sth [‘kava]
creation [kri'efn]
above all [2bav il]
unique selling point/
proposition (USP)
Guynick'seluy pomnt/
propazifn]
furthermore [,f3:50'mo:]
add-on [‘ed on]
to distinguish sth from
sth [distingwif fram]
mark-up ['ma:kap]
to generate a profit
[dgenarett a‘profit]
to price sth [prais]
on the other hand
[on öi'ada hand]
order ['o:da]
early adopter [li
a'dopta]
etw absagen
etw herausbringen, etw auf
den Markt bringen
Iteration, Version,
Entwicklungszyklus
brauchbar, durchführbar
Minimalprodukt
iterativ
auf etw tippen
etw veröffentlichen,
etw freigeben
etw in Ordnung bringen,
etw reparieren
etw abnehmen,
abschließen
Trainer/in
Formalität
aufmerksam, wach
bei etw bleiben, sich an
etw halten
etw aktivieren
Abkürzung
deutlicher Hinweis
(auf etw)
etw zerstören
etw abdecken, etw (Thema
usw.) behandeln
Schöpfung, Schaffung,
Kreation
vorallem
Alleinstellungsmerkmal
darüber hinaus
Zusatzleistung, Extra
etw von etw unterscheiden
Preisaufschlag
einen Gewinn erzielen
den Preis für etw ansetzen
andererseits
Bestellung, Auftrag
Frih-Anwender/in,
Vor-
reiter/in (beim Konsum
eines Produkts)
increasing(ly)[i'krisim] zunehmend
critical [krıtıkl]
entscheidend
to distribute sth
etw vertreiben
[a'stribjut]
distribution channel
_ Vertriebskanal,
[ distrr’bjusintfeenl]
Vertriebsweg
end consumer [end
Endverbraucher/in
kan’sjuzma]
component
Bestandteil
[kam'paonant]
retail space [‘rstetl spers] Ladenflache
promotion
[pra mau]
Werbung
publicity [pab’Iısati]
Offentlichkeitsarbeit,
öffentliche Aufmerk-
samkeit, Publicity
high-profile (har
mit großer öffentlicher
praofatl]
‚Aufmerksamkeit
tohand sth overtosb
_jdm etw übergeben
[hand '2ova]
in particular
[in pa'tikjala] im Besonderen
search engine|‘ss:tf
Suchmaschine
endzın]
optimization
Optimierung
Loptimar'zeifn]
rise [rat]
Aufstieg
word-of-mouth
Mundpropaganda
advertising [,ws:d av
‘mao® edvataizm)
wise [watz]
klug, vernünftig
page
tocomeupwithsth
sich etw ausdenken, sich
[kam ap wid]
etw einfallen lassen
warranty [woranti]
Gewährleistung
to distribute sth
etw verteilen
[di'stribjust]
to hire sb [hara]
jdn engagieren
demonstration
Vorführung
[deman’streifn]
toset sth up [set'ap]
 etweinrichten
range of colours
Farbpalette, Farbauswahl
[reid af’kalaz]
rough [raf]
grob
outline [aotlarn]
Überblick
page 80
promotional [pra'maofanl] Werbe
desire [di'zara]
Wunsch, Verlangen
tograbsb’s attention _jds Aufmerksamkeit
[grab sambadiz
fesseln
atten]
engaging [mgeidzm]
ansprechend, fesseind
to wonder ['wanda]
sich fragen
toarouse sth [2'raoz]___etw wecken, etw erregen
toconvey
sth [kan'vei]
_etwvermitteln
toadmire sth [ad'mara]
etw bewundern
to desire sth [dı'zaıa]
play sth [c'splet]
page
to meet sth [mit]
enquiry (in'kwarari}
prototype [‘provtataip]
We note from your web-
that...
(wi: ‚naot
fram
jo: websatt dat]
unit [jusnit]
page
tonne [tan
in the first place [in ds
‘fost pleis]
compostable
[kompostabl]
to break down [,breik
‘daon|
toeliminate sth
['limmert}
grower ['grava]
own brand [,20n brand]
dried fruit (,draid 'fruct]
dispenser [ci'spensa]
container [kan'temna]
to return sth [ri'ts:n]
sell-by date [sel bat ‘deit]
labelling [‘Iesblin]
shell [fel]
to pass sth on to sb
[pars ‘on ta]
price rise [praisrauz]
wastage ['werstids]
page 83
to promote sth
[pre'maot]
torenounce sth
[r'naons]
single-use [ sing ju:s]
loose [lu
distribution [distrrbjun]
packing crate ['paekin
kreit]
reverse logistics [rıvs:s
Iaidsistiks]
produce [‘prodjus]
distribution chain
[distrr’bjusfn Yeın]
straw [stro:]
Appendix
etw wünschen, etw
begehren
etw zeigen, etw zur Schau
stellen
einer Sache entsprechen
Anfrage
Prototyp
Wir entnehmen Ihrer
Website, dass
Stück, Einheit
Tonne
von vornherein
kompostierbar
sich abbauen, sich
zersetzen
etw beseitigen, etw
eliminieren
Erzeuger/in
Hausmarke
Trockenfriichte
Spender, Behälter
Behälter
etw zurückgeben
Mindesthaltbarkeitsdatum
Etikettierung,
Kennzeichnung
Schale
etw an jdn weitergeben,
etw an jdn weiterreichen
Preisanstieg
Verschwendung, Abfall
etw fördern, für etw
Werbung machen
auf etw verzichten
Einweg-
lose
Vertrieb
Transportkiste
Rücknahmelogistik
(landwirtschaftliche)
Erzeugnisse
Vertriebskette
Strohhalm

--- Seite 148 ---
UNIT WORD LIST
page 84
to encourage sth
etw fördern, etw unter
[in'karid3]
stützen
to source sth [so:s]
etw (Produkte usw, bezie-
hen, etw beschaffen
to support
sth [so'po:t]
etw unterstützen, etw
fördern
to lower sth [1a0o]
etw senken, etw reduzieren
refundable deposit
Pfand
I fandabl dı'pozit]
toexpandsthtosth
etw auf etw ausweiten
ik’speend ta]
sticker ['stika]
Aufkleber
grain [grein]
Getreide
polycarbonate
Polycarbonat
{pol'ka:baneıt]
to block sth [blok]
etw nicht durchlassen
resistant (to sth)
beständig (gegen etw)
[n'zistant]
todiscolour[diskala]
sich verfärben
toturnyellow[tsn
_vergilben
'jeloo]
toassemble sth
etw montieren, etw
['sembi]
zusammenbauen
bio-safe [’baiao seıf]
biologisch sicher
foodstuffs p/[furdstafs]
Lebensmittel
to protect sth from sth
etw voretw schützen
[pro'tekt from]
touch [tat{]
Berührung, Kontakt
VAT (value addedtax)
Mehrwertsteuer (MwSt)
Lyelju:'adıd tacks}
tohesitate[heziteit]
zögern
page 86
to head
for sth ‘hed fa]
auf etw zusteuern, sich auf
etw zubewegen
choice [is]
Auswahl
author [5:82]
Verfasser/in, Autor/in
surveillance [ss:veilans]
Überwachung, Beaufsich:
tigung
ultimate ['altimat]
eigentlich, endgültig
capitalism [keepitalizam] Kapitalismus
to automate sth
etw automatisieren
[o:tamert]
millenium [m'leniam]
Jahrtausend
to perfect sth [pa'fekt]
etw perfektionieren
togathersth['ge0a]___
etwsammeln, etw
zusammentragen
behaviour [biheivjp]
Verhalten
prediction [pr'dikjn]
Vorhersage, Prognose
to anticipate sth
etw vorwegnehmen,
[en'tistpert]
etwerahnen
speaker [spi:ko]
Lautsprecher
behavioural [bi‘hervjarl]
Verhaltens:
totrade
in sth [‘treidm]
mit etw Handel treiben
to sign sth away [san
awei]
legal language [li:gl
‘lengwids]
elsewhere [.els'wea]
to point to sth [‘pomt ta]
to drive sth [draiv]
to wake up to sth [weık
apta]
government
['gavanmant]
blessing ['blesin]
curse [ks's]
page 88
means of communi-
cation [,miznz af
komjunı'keifn]
landline ['eendlam]
recipient [n'sipiont]
to dictate [dik' tert]
secure [si kjua]
insecure [ns kjoa]
to post sth [paost]
snail mail 'sneıl meıl]
page 89
transaction [tren’zeekjn]
buyer ['bara]
seller [‘sela]
offer [‘ofa]
special offer [‚spefl fa]
to place an order (with
sb) [,pleıs an ‘a:da]
(order) acknowledge-
ment [ak'nolidsmant]
to confirm sth [kan'fa:m]
sample ['sa:mpl]
free of charge
[fri: af
Yazdz]
as regards ... [22 ri'ga:dz]
payment in advance
[peimant in ad'va:ns]
substitute product
[‘sabstitjuct prodakt]
above-mentioned
[abav 'menfnd]
dated ... [date] [‘deitid]
terms pl of payment
[[ts:mz af ‘permant]
auf etw verzichten
Juristensprache
woanders, anderswo
auf etw hindeuten
etwantreiben
sich etw (endlich)
klarmachen
Regierung, öffentliche
Verwaltung
Segen
Fluch
Kommunikationsmittel
Festnetz(telefon)
Empfanger/in, Adressat/in
diktieren
sicher
unsicher
etw (Brief usw) einwerfen,
etw absenden
Schneckenpost
Vorgang, Transaktion
Käufer/in
Verkäufer/in
Angebot
Sonderangebot
(jdm) einen Auftrag ertei
len, eine Bestellung (bei
jdm) aufgeben
Auftragsbestätigung
etw bestätigen
Muster, Probe
kostenlos, unentgeltlich
was...
betrifft, was... angeht
Vorkasse, Vorauszahlung
Ersatzprodukt, Ausweich
produkt
obengenannt
vom... [Datum]
Zahlungsbedingungen
cash with order (CWO)
( kaef wid ‘ada
in the near future [in da
Huf]
to transfer sth [traens'fs:]
price list [‘prais ist]
to supply
sb with sth
[so'plar wid]
to request sth [rv'kwest]
page 90
confidential [.konf'den{l)
Attn. [a'ten{n]
instructions pl
Lun'strakjnz]
copy [kopi]
general terms and
conditions pl[,dzenral
sımz and kan'difinz]
letterhead [etahed]
reference
initials pl
('refarans mlz]
marking ['mo:kin]
inside address [,nsaid
a'dres]
attention line [atenfn
lam)
salutation [seljutein]
subject line ['sabdsikt
lan]
body [’bodi]
complimentary close
[komplı,mentri klaoz]
signature [sıgnatfo]
enclosure (enc) [in'kloose]
page 91
postal address [,paostl
adres]
initials
all-figure [1 ige]
order ('o:da]
urgent(ly) [s:dzont]
registered/recorded
delivery [,redsistad/
ryko:did d'hvari]
capital letter [kept]
letz]
to name sb/sth [neim]
page 92
Punctuation
Lpaoktfuein]
to link sth [link]
unmarried [an'merid]
Kasse bei Auftragserteilung
demnächst, bald, zeitnah
etw (Geld) überweisen
Preisliste
jdm etw liefern
etw wünschen
vertraulich
Anleitung
Exemplar
Allgemeine
Geschäftsbedingungen
Briefkopf
(Brief) Zeichen
Vermerk
Innenadresse
Zeile „zu Händen“
(Brief) Anrede
Betreff(zeile)
(Grief usw.) Haupttext
(Brief. Schlussformel
Unterschrift
Anlage
Postadresse
Initialen
nur aus Ziffern bestehend
Reihenfolge
dringend
Einschreiben
GroBbuchstabe
jdn/etw nennen
Zeichensetzung, Inter.
punktion
etw (miteinander)
verknüpfen
unverheiratet
married [‘meerid]
marital status merit]
‘steitas]
Proper name [propo
to separate sth [separeit]
position {pa'ziin}
equivalent [kwivalont]
signatory Üsıgnatri]
page 93
translation [trens’leifn]
representative
Lreprt'zentativ]
tobe pleased to do sth
[bi plitzd ta ‘du:]
page 94
carbon copy [ka:ban
kopi]
to enter sth [‘enta]
tosign off [sain 'of]
page
sales figures p/['seilz
figaz]
confirm:
[konfa'merfin}
furniture [sta]
page 96
trade fair [treid fea]
booth [.dzeki bud]
and beyond [and bi jond]
grateful (greitfl]
comprehensive cata-
logue [komprı,hensiv
katalog]
entire [in'taia]
export price list ['ekspoxt
prais lst]
page 97
well-established [,wel
vsteebhft]
long-standing customer
[lop jsteendin ‘kastama]
favourable [feivarabl]
quotation [kwao'teifn]
first-aid kit [faster
kat]
delivery period [clivari
piariad]
port [po:t]
Appendix
verheiratet
Familienstand
Eigenname
etwtrennen
Stellung, Position
Entsprechung, Übersetzung
Unterzeichnete/r,
Unterzeichner/in
Übersetzung
Vertreter/in
etwgerntun
(Brief usw.) Durchschlag,
Kopie
etw Text. usw) eingeben
sich verabschieden,
unterzeichnen
Verkaufszahlen,
Umsatzzahlen
Bestätigung
Möbel
Branchenmesse, Fachmesse
(Messe-)Stand
und darüber hinaus
dankbar
Gesamtkatalog,
gesamte/r/s
Exportpreisliste
gut eingeführt, bestens
bekannt
langjährige/r Kunde/-in
günstig
Preisangebot, Angebot
Verbandskasten, Erste-
Hilfe-Set
Lieferfrist
Hafen
