
--- Page 1 ---
Nordrhein-Westfalen of

--- Page 2 ---
So. 15. Feb. 16:37

--- Page 3 ---
KlettLernen
Bearbeiten
ATLANTIC
CELTIC SEA
Isles of Seilly 5
Guems
Suerte.
Shetland Islands
Ud Kngden
Isle of Wight
ENGLISH CHANNEL off Upgrade
Berufsfachschule
Nordrhein-Westfalen von
David Christie
Ernst Klett Verlag
Stuttgart - Leipzig

--- Page 4 ---
Kickoff Upgrade
Das neue 2-bandige Kickoff Nordrhein-Westfalen entspricht komplett dem Lehrplan der Ausbildungsvorbereitungsschule und der BerufsAutor: David Christie, Oxford fachschule, Typ | und Il in Nordrhein-Westfalen.
Beraterin: Ute Schönenberg-Beyer, Meerbusch — Durch die Aufteilung in 2 Bände kann Kickoff - je nach Schulart folgendermaßen eingesetzt werden:
Werkübersicht: Kickoff-Band | Schulart Bildungsziel Sprachniveau
Kickoff Foundation Nordrhein-Westfalen Schülerbuch, Englisch für die Ausbildungsvorbereitungsschule/ Kickoff Ausbildungsvorbereitungsschule nachgeholter oder qualifi | Foundation: A2
Berufsfachschule, 978-3-12-808290-5 Foundation | Berufsfachschule Typ | (erstes Jahr) | zierter Hauptschulabschluss
Kickoff Foundation Nordrhein-Westfalen Workbook mit Losungsheft, 978-3-12-808293-6 Kickoff Berufsfachschule Typ | (zweites Jahr) | Qualifizierter Real- Upgrade: B1
Kickoff Upgrade Nordrhein-Westfalen Schülerbuch, Englisch für die Berufsfachschule, 978-3-12-808291-2 Upgrade Berufsfachschule Typ II schulabschluss
Kickoff Upgrade Nordrhein-Westfalen Workbook mit Lösungsheft, 978-3-12-808294-3
Kickoff Nordrhein-Westfalen Lehrerhandbuch inkl. Digitalem Lehrer-Service mit Medien-DVD-ROM + — Noch übersichtlicher durch das komplett überarbeitete Layout.
Lehrer-Audio-CDs (2), 978-3-12-808292-9 — Zahlreiche Differenzierungsmöglichkeiten zur individuellen Förderung durch neue Texte und Aufgaben mit unterschiedlichem Schwierigkeitsgrad (leicht - mittel - schwer) auf den selektiv ansteuerbaren
More please!-Seiten.
— Zahlreiche inhaltliche Erweiterungen:
- Viele zusätzliche Texte und Hörverständnisaufgaben
- 7 neue Videos zum Training des Seh-/Hörverstehens
- Alle Skills werden mittels Skills files ausführlich dargestellt.
- Berufsspezifische Vertiefung durch Job pages im Anhang.
65432 — Vertieftes Vokabular- und Grammatiktraining:
1. Auflage 1 119 8 17 16 15 Kickoff Foundation Workbook
Kickoff Upgrade Workbook
Alle Drucke dieser Auflage sind unverändert und können im Unterricht nebeneinander verwendet werden. P P . P uns, m
Die letzte Zahl bezeichnet das Jahr des Druckes. — Im Preis bereits dabei: neues, interaktives Vokabeltraining online
Das Werk und seine Teile sind urheberrechtlich geschützt. Jede Nutzung in anderen als den gesetzlich zugelassenen und zahlreiche Downloads durch Eingabe von Kickoff-Codes auf
Fällen bedarf der vorherigen schriftlichen Einwilligung des Verlages. Hinweis $ 52 a UrhG: Weder das Werk noch seine www.klett.de.
Teile dürfen ohne eine solche Einwilligung eingescannt und in ein Netzwerk eingestellt werden. Dies gilt auch für
Intranets von Schulen und sonstigen Bildungseinrichtungen. Fotomechanische oder andere Wiedergabeverfahren nur mit Genehmigung des Verlages.
Im Lehrwerk befinden sich ausschließlich fiktive Internet-Adressen, die deshalb auch mit ww#. beginnen anstatt wie
Unln mt owe ® Lernhilfen und Symbole:
Die im Buch abgedruckten Mediencodes führen zu interaktiven Zusatzübungen und Downloads auf www.klett.de.
Die Mediencodes leiten ausschließlich zu optionalen Unterrichtsmaterialien, sie unterliegen nicht dem staatlichen
Zulassungsverfahren. ‚Am Ende von ‚si
Unit4 kann ich: Lernziele des Lehrplans © Videoverweis
© Ernst Klett Verlag GmbH, Stuttgart 2014. Alle Rechte vorbehalten. www.klett.de
Sprachtipps für deutsche Lerner Verweis auf die Grammatik
Projektleitung: Karin Altricht Interkulturelles PMIR Produktion, Mediation, rojektleitung: Karin Altrichter oo A A
Redaktion: Chris Caridia, London — (Vokabel) Die wichtigsten Vokabeln . Interaktion oder Rezeption
Herstellung: Sarah Ganser auf der Seite auf einen Blick @ 2se2hk _Vokabeltraining online über i ie ie wwwklett.de und Audio-Download
Satz und Gestaltung: Marion Köster, Stuttgart hinweis auf die . (MP3)
Umschlaggestaltung: KOMA AMOK, Kunstbüro für Gestaltung, Stuttgart Differenzierungsseiten . : |
Illustrationen: Uwe Alfer, Wakibreitbach; Tanja Kischel, München; Jeongsook Lee, Heidelberg Video Lounge authentische Videos - Differenzierung nach unten
Reproduktion: Meyle + Miller Medien-Management, Pforzheim a 5 A a Giferencieakienech chert
Druck: PASSAVIA Druckservice GmbH & Co. KG, Passau s&s Audioverweis e
Printed in Germany I INN!
ISBN 978-3-12-808291-2 9"783128"082912

--- Page 5 ---
Check-out activities / Check-out activities /
Topics Language Video Lounge Topics Language Video Lounge
Unit 1 Get ready for work! 6 Unit 6 Apprenticeships 56
> vocational colleges in revision of: > posting a message on > apprenticeships in > ifsentences type2 > writing a CV
England > simple present the internet England > describing a cartoon
> choosing a career > present continuous > introducing yourself in a > applying for an > Video lounge
> talking about yourself, > simple past short talk apprenticeship Applying for a job your college, and your > will future > Video lounge > an interview for an future plans > must /mustn't/ Choosing a career apprenticeship have to/ don't have to
Unit 2 Travelling for work 16
= > talking about travel > relative pronouns > writing a holiday
> how airports work who, which, where postcard
> understanding hotel > relativesentencees > role-playing travel brochures situations
> checking in at a hotel > Video lounge
Welcome back
Unit 7 Starting work 66
> working as a retail > verbs + infinitive / > making a mindmap assistant verbs + ing-form > making a conversation
> tips for the first days about a job at work > Video lounge
Starting a new job
Unit 3 A visit to a company 26 Partner files / Job Pages / Test 76
> understanding companies > adjectives and > writing a report Partner files 7 and processes adverbs > making a poster about Job pages: 78
MM > introducing yourself and > adverbs of manner a company > Phoning at work (Unit 1)
BSR others politely > Video lounge > Preparing for a meeting (Unit 2)
Plans > Business correspondence 1: an enquiry (Unit 3)
> Business correspondence 2: an offer (Unit 4)
> Business correspondence 3: an order (Unit 5)
> Business correspondence 4: a complaint (Unit 6)
Unit 4 Global business 36 = Understanding advertisements (Unit 7) 92
> living in a globalised world > simple present > a dass survey
> the production and global passive > making a poster about distribution of goods > simple past passive a process/an aspect of .
> the ‘good’ and ‘bad’ sides globalisation Anhang Grammar summary / Skills files / Vocabulary 96 of globalisation > Video lounge Grammar summary 97
How was your visit? Skills files 107
Unitbegleitendes Vokabular 120
Alphabetisches Vokabular 131
Unit 5 A month in New Zealand 46 Abbildungsnachweis 85
> New Zealand: country, > present perfect with > writing a text to describe people, history since /for Germany
> using polite language > Video lounge to deal with everyday Goodbye situations
Nu

--- Page 6 ---
Check-in | Training | More please Checkout
1 Hi! I'm a student pi A Describe the picture at the top opposite. Make notes with the + phrases below, then compare with a partner and report to Hier und dort the dass. — Skills 13 Sowohl in den USA als auch in Großbritannien und in
In the picture there are ... people. einigen anderen englisch
They seem to bein... sprachigen Landem findet
In the foreground /background you can see ... die Berufsbildung auf einem
On the right /the left ... college statt, und die Lernen
I think one (of the people) isa ... den sind students. In Kickoff
The other (person) is maybe ... benutzen wir durchgehend
They're ...ing (looking at? talking about? ...?) diese Worter fiir dich und
Perhaps ... deine Schule.
ei B The young man in the picture is Colin and opposite you can see
A his college. Read what Colin says below and answer the questions.
A2ı
Hi! My name's Colin Williams and | live in the UK - in a town in the north of England called Bolton. I'm 17 years old and I'ma student at a vocational college. | started my course last year, so now I'm in my second year at college. If all goes well,
Il finish at the end of this year and then
I want to become an IT technician.
1 Where does Colin come from and where is he a student?
2 When did he start his course and when will he finish?
3 What job does Colin want to have after college? Am Ende von
Unit1 habe ich >< e ei C Nowyou! Say ‘hi’ to your class and give some facts
U n it 1 about yourself. — Grundlagen der
Grammatik wiederholt,
— berufsspezifische Vokabeln
Get ready for work! > (to be a) student — (vocational) college — course Sur
— to become (a ...) ork! 7

--- Page 7 ---
oo
Check-in | Training | More please! | checkout
2 At college in England rp A Readabout vocational education in England and answer
& the questions below. Write full sentences for your answers.
A22 aie B Listen to Colin again. Are the sentences below true or false?
& Write down'T’ or ‘F and correct the false sentences. Compare
A23 with a partner, then report to the class. — Skills 13
1 Colin was born in Bolton.
F. He was born in...
2 He came to live in Bolton when he was 11.
3 His family moved there because his mum got a job.
4 He likes Bolton now but he was unhappy at first.
5 Colin was good at most subjects at school.
6 He chose the IT course because his dad helped him a lot.
e Rz 7 Colin is in his first year at college in Bolton.
_ , Ze 8 He likes college because he feels like an adult and not a little kid.
ze C Work in small groups to do the tasks below, then report to the dass.
FE students usually stay at their college for two years. Classes are normally full-time, five days a week. Classes start at around 9 am and finish around 4 pm and because students are at college all day, there is always a cafeteria where they can eat at lunchtime. 1 Copy the chart below and fill in the missing forms of the verb to work.
10 So what do students learn at college? That depends. FE colleges in Britain are often very large and offer many different kinds The simple The present The simple of courses, but many 16- to 18-year-olds choose a course at the present continuous past beginning of their two years which trains them for a job - for N work ? ?
example, a ‘hairdressing course’ or one to become a construction 7 5 =
15 worker or a fashion designer. Colin Williams wants to be a he/she/it | ? working ?
computer technician, so he is on an IT course. Many classes are we ? ? worked practical, so colleges usually have workshops for mechanics, oz 7 ? ?
kitchens for trainee chefs, and computer rooms for students like they 5 5 5
Colin. In the picture, one of Colin’s friends, Michael, is working
2 in the college’s woodworking workshop. He is training to be a carpenter and at the moment he is cutting a piece of wood. His teacher is watching and helping.
2 Check your answers in class, then find two or three examples of each tense in the text on page 8 and task B on this page.
Remember! The simple past forms of some verbs are irregular for example, eat > ate or go — went - and some of the verbs in
1 What two different things can British school pupils do at the task B are like this!
age of 16? 3 Look at the information about these tenses at the back of your
2 Why do British FE colleges usually have a cafeteria? book, then explain why your sentences are examples of the
3 Name four different kinds of courses for 16- to 18-year-olds at simple past, present continuous or simple past.
a typical FE college.
4 Where does Colin work a lot of the time each day when he is at college?
5 Whois the person in the foreground of the picture at the bottom? What is he doing at the moment?
— full-time education -—> an FE college — (to be on) a course — togotoschool — funny — (to have) a sense of humour
— That depends -— to train (to be sth) — to decide (to do sth) — an adult («> a kid)
Nachste Seite
BBCADDBB*

--- Page 8 ---
@ KlettLernen
Bearbeiten So. 15. Feb. 16:37 of? x
Check-in More please!
Check-out
Choosing a career is never easy and before you decide, it is agood idea to get information about lots of different jobs. One way to do this is to look at some ‘job profiles’ - for example, online. You can
10 see two profiles below.
Description
Nursery workers work with babies and small children in a nursery.
Tasks
* feeding and changing babies
* organising play activities
» reading stories
* taking children out in groups
* making sure that children are safe and well
* talking to parents
Skills
Nursery workers have to:
be interested in children
" know about safety and hygiene
» work wellin a team
« be responsible and caring job profile task — skill(s)
— to type (documents) — to communicate (with sb)
— (to be) responsible
RP
JOB PROFILE
Description
Administrative assistants work in an office and itis their job to make sure that day-to-day life in the office runs smoothly. RP
Tasks opening letters answering the telephone looking after visitors typing letters and other documents receiving and sending emails photocopying and printing documents
Skills
Administrative assistants have to
" like working in an office
" be accurate and well-organised
* be good with computers
= work wellin a team
" communicate well with people
Chloe Taylor is 16 and a pupil at a school in England. She wants to leave school this year and go to an FE college, but can't decide what career she would like to choose. She is looking at the two job profiles opposite. Complete the sentences about the two jobs.
1 If Chloe becomes an administrative assistant, she will work in an (where?).
2 If she becomes a nursery worker, she will work in a
3 If she becomes a ‚She will work with children.
4 She won't work with children if she becomes a work with adults).
5 Chloe likes computers and if she becomes a she will type documents and send emails.
6 But Chloe also loves playing with her little sister and if she becomes a ‚she will organise play activities.
(she will
Now complete the table below and write three more sentences about the two jobs on page 10 like those in task A above.
if + simple present will
If she becomes a nursery worker, | she will (won't) ...
Compare the two jobs again. Look at the Tips and tricks box and then say if the sentences below are true or false. Correct the false sentences. — More please! ]
1 Admin assistants have to be good with computers. T
2 Admin assistants have to be good with children. F
Admin assistants ... with children.
3 Admin assistants have to like working in an office.
4 Nursery workers have to like working in an office.
5 Nursery workers have to make children unhappy.
6 Admin assistants have to make lots of mistakes in documents.
7 Admin assistants and nursery workers both have to work well inateam.
8 And they both have to feed and change babies.
— administrative (admin) assistant — nursery (worker)
— toorganise sth —to makea mistake
Vorsicht!
you have to (must) = du musst you don't have to = du musst nicht (brauchst nicht) you mustn't = du darfst nicht
Unit 1 Get ready for work!

--- Page 9 ---
@ KlettLernen
Bearbeiten
Check-in Training Check-out
Complete the sentences with the correct forms of the verbs in brackets (...).
1 (live) | live in Germany.
2 (live) Colin in England.
3 (go) He to an FE college in Bolton.
4 (go) Lots of young people in Britain
5 (start) | usually my lessons at 830.
6 (start) Colin at nine.
7 (eat) At lunchtime, he in the cafeteria.
8 (finish) And he college at around 4 pm.
to an FE college.
Complete these sentences with the present continuous forms of the verbs in brackets (...).
1 (work) At the moment, Colin is working in the computer room.
2 (learn) I English at the moment.
3 (do) What you at the moment?
4 (train) In this picture, Colin’s friend Michael
5 (aut) He ... apiece of wood right now.
6 (cut) These students are in the college's hairdressing salon.
They hair.
to be a carpenter.
Choose the correct forms of the verbs a or b.
1 Colin Williams a) lives _b) is living in England.
2 He a) wants b) is wanting to be a computer technician.
3 | a) live b) am living in Germany.
4 Right now, Colin a) works b) is working in the computer room at college.
5 Right now,!a)do b)am doing this exercise.
6 You can see two people in this picture. They a) talk b) are talking.
7 Hi, George. What a) do youdo b)are you doing at the moment?
-la)listen b) am listening to music on my smartphone.
8 In England, college students usually a) have b) are having lunch in the cafeteria.
Nicht vergessen:
he/she/it das 's’ muss mit!
Complete the sentences with the correct form of the verb in brackets (...).
1 (come) Colin Williams comes from Bolton in the north of England.
2 (not/come) | from England, I'm German.
3 (stay) In England, young people at school or college until they are 18.
4 (have) English FE colleges usually students can do practical lessons.
5 (work/ cut) In this picture, some students hairdressing salon. Right now, they ... hair.
6 (do) At the moment, | this exercise.
7 (do/ listen) Hi Maria. What at the moment? - | my smartphone.
rooms and workshops where in the college’s to music on
Write the sentences again with the adverb in the correct place in the sentences.
1 (usually) | come to college by bike.
1 usually come to college by bike.
2 (sometimes) But in the winter, | come by bus.
3 (often) British students have lunch in the college cafeteria.
4 (normally) English FE colleges are very large.
5 (never) I'm late for lessons!
6 (never) And | use my mobile during lessons!
This is Rebecca. Choose the correct verbs to finish the text about her. Use each verb only once.
Rebecca goes to the FE college in Bolton where
Colin is also a student. Rebecca - or ‘Becky’ to her friends - (1) was born in Bolton and she (2) to school there until she (3) 16. She (4) the deverest pupil in her class at school but she
(5) art and being creative. And in her last two years at school she (6) a great art teacher who (7) Becky a lot with her ideas. So when she started college, Becky (8) to do a fashion design course. Her mum and dad also (9) this was a great idea - they have a small shop in Bolton which sells clothes.
Becky loves the course and last year she (10) a prize for her dothes in a fashion competition.
had loved was went was born decided helped thought wasn't won
So. 15. Feb. 16:37 i}

--- Page 10 ---
@ KlettLernen
Bearbeiten
Check-in | Training
Complete the sentences with the verbs in brackets. Use the simple past.
Be careful! Lots of verbs are irregular.
1 (be bom /go) | was born in my hometown and | to school here, too.
2 (be) My favourite subjects at school history and English.
3 (be/visit) One great thing at school a class trip - we London.
4 (see/eat/meet) We lots of famous sights, fish and chips, and some young English people.
5 (leave /start) I school last summer and college two weeks ago.
6 (not be) It easy at first, but | think I'll like it here. We'll see!
en
Look at the job pictures and match the sentence halves below.
Use your dictionary for any words you don’t know.
1 If you become a painter and decorator, a you will repair cars.
2 If you become a mechanic, b if you become a nurse.
3 You will work in a kitchen c if you work in an office one day.
4 You will help sick people d you will work in a shop.
5 If you become a shop assistant, e you will paint and decorate houses and flats.
6 You will often talk on the phone f if you become a chef.
Look at the job pictures above and quickly complete task H. Now choose three pictures and write a sentence about each yourself. Use conditional sentences type 1.
Choose the correct forms a or b.
1 This isa NO SMOKING sign. It means you a) mustn't b) must smoke here.
2 And this NO PARKING sign means you a) mustn't b) don’t have to park here.
3 | go tocollege Monday to Friday but | a)mustn't b) don't have to go at weekends.
4 In Germany we drive on the right. But you a) don'thave to b) mustn't drive on the right in England, Australia or Japan. In these countries you a) mustn't b) have to drive on the left.
[2] vi
OH Q
Work in small groups.
Copy and complete the table. Then choose one task below:
a You have an intemet link with an FE college in England. The students there want to know about you and your college in
Germany. Write a short text based on your table.
b Next week you will go to a conference in London for vocational students from around the EU. At the start of the conference, students have to introduce themselves to the others. Write and give a short talk (2-3 minutes) based on your table .
Personal details (name, age, live in ...)
Born? (where? when?)
School (where? favourite subjects? favourite teacher?)
College (where? name? when did you start?)
Daily routine (lessons, times, lunch, subjects)
Career plans —_ (want to do after college? Can you give a reason?)
Hello. My name is ... 'mand 1 .../1 was born ... | went to school .../
Video Lounge
Maya lives in London. Today, she is at a careers advice centre. You will see two parts of her interview with a woman called Louise Kane. Watch and answer the questions.
Part1 bs
1 What is Maya's “dream job”?
2 What subjects did she like at school?
3 What activities does she like?
4 What job profile does she look at on the careers database?
Part 2
Maya thinks that to be a hotel manager would be nice, but she will need to train for three years and she thinks that's too long.
1 What does Ms Kane suggest? Where and with what company?
2 What tip does she give Maya at the very end? Why does she say this?
Unit 1 Get ready for work!
15
So. 15. Feb. 16:37 oy

--- Page 11 ---
Check-in | Training | More please Check-out
1 Check in!
ie A Talkin class. How do you travel? Finish the sentences with the best words for you.
11... come to college by bike.
2 Intown,!_... travel by bus.
3 |... travel by tram or S-Bahn.
4 When I goon holiday, |... travel by plane. He always Tips and tricks often You go usually / normally by bike /train/ bus /tram/ sometimes underground never by car (or you drive) hardly ever by plane (or you fly) on foot (or you walk)
Herr Kreuger is a businessman. Today, he's on a business trip to
London. Right now he’s checking in at the check-in desk. Finish the sentences below with who, which or where.
1 The place ... you check in at an airport is the check-in desk.
2 The man ... is checking in here is Herr Kreuger.
3 The woman „,. is helping him is Frau Bliscz. She's a check-in clerk.
4 The document ... she has in her hand is Herr Kreuger’s boarding card.
pC Finish these sentences in your own words.
1 An airport is a place where ... Am Ende von
2 A businessman or woman is a person who... Unit2 kann ich: ><
3 A plane is a big machine which ...
HA... iS... — über Reisen, Flughäfen und Hotels sprechen und
H schreiben,
U n it 2 — Menschen, Sachen und Orte detailliert beschreiben,
1 .
Tra vel ng for work »tocheckin —> (check-in) desk — (check-in) derk ~ eine Postkarte erstellen.
— boarding card
Aa 16 E mavoyt Unit 2 Travelling for work 17

--- Page 12 ---
@ KlettLernen
Bearbeiten
RP
18
Check-in More please! Check-out
RP
Look at the picture of the airport on the next page and read the text below. Then answer the questions.
People who travel by plane from or to an airport (like Herr
Kreuger) are passengers. When passengers fly from an airport, they go to DEPARTURES. First, they check in at the check-in desk. The check-in clerk gives them a boarding card. On it, consis BEER ER passengers can see the number of the gate where their plane Eee departs. v LONDON HEATHROW LHR
FUGHT NUMBER DAY DATE TIME
Aa Mm oBsePr omas
Next they go through the security check. Here, security officers SEAT GATE check people's clothes and their hand baggage. After that, “> 2 passengers go through the passport check. Passport officers u .
check their passports. Now passengers usually have some Aw „1177 time before their plane departs. There are cafés, restaurants eo = and shops where they can eat, drink and buy things. >
Finally, passengers get on (or ‘board’) the plane - and the plane takes off. And when passengers arrive at an airport?
Well, they go through the passport check, get their baggage at the baggage reclaim, go through the customs check (where 1 customs officers sometimes check their baggage) - and that's it. Easy!
Put these words in the right order under the right heading.
You can use some words twice.
departure arrival check-in desk
— passenger —todepart — (hand)baggage —tocheck —to arrive at (an airport) oqa
Here are some people, places and things which you find atan airport. What are they? Finish the definitions, then make two more definitions yourself.
1 The security check is the place where security officers ...
2 A passport officer is a person/someone ...
3 A boarding pass is something/ a document ...
Your German friend has to fly to the USA tomorrow. It’s his/her first time at an airport. Explain in German what he or she has to do at the airport - first here in Germany, then when he/she arrives in the
USA.
Can you give the missing words?
People A pilot is a person / someone ... flies a plane.
Things A plane is a big machine ... can fly.
Places A restaurant is a place ... you can eat and drink.
— departure(s) —arrival(s) — baggage redaim — duty free (shop) — customs
Unit 2 Travelling for work 19
Nachste Seite
So. 15. Feb. 16:37 i}

--- Page 13 ---
Bearbeiten
@ KlettLernen
(on) 20
Training | More please!
But
3 At ahotel
A Readabout Sandra and look at the hotel brochure. Then answer the questions on the next page.
Sandra Kaiser is from Hamburg in Germany. She has an exciting job. Her company builds roller coasters - the big machines which you often see at theme parks and fairs. Sandra is an electrical technician. She checks and services the electrical equipment on the roller coasters. Her company builds roller coasters around the world, so Sandra often travels in her job and she often stays at hotels. This week, she’s at a hotel in the north of England called the River Hotel.
We come %
The River GH botel
‘The River Hotel is a quiet, friendly hotel only 10 minutes on foot from the River Towers
‘Theme Park. Ideal for families - children under
10 stay free.
ROOMS
12 single rooms
10 double rooms
10 family rooms (2 adults + 2 children)
All rooms have a bathroom and shower.
FACILITIES
The River Restaurant
Bar
Garden with children’s playground
Free parking
TV in allrooms
WiFi Internet connection
Please note that we are a non-smoking hotel.
— to service (equipment) —to stay at(a hotel) — single /double room
— facilities
PL
1 Answer the questions about Sandra and her job in full sentences.
a Where's Sandra from?
b What does Sandra’s company build?
c What's a roller coaster?
d What's Sandra’s job? What work does she do?
e What does Sandra often do in her job? Why?
f Where's Sandra this week?
2 True or false? Note downT or F.
a The hotel has a total of 32 rooms.
b You can walk from the hotel to the River Towers Theme Park in
10 minutes.
c You can smoke at the hotel.
d A mum, a dad and three children can stay in a family room.
e Children under 10 don't have to pay for their room.
f Parking at the hotel costs £1.00 a day.
g You can use the internet at the hotel.
h The single rooms at the hotel don't have a bathroom or shower.
Sandra is checking in at the hotel. Listen. Find the missing words from the list below.
6am to 10 am - key - the second floor - registration form Asingle room - You're welcome. - 214
Receptionist Sandra
Hello. How can | help you?
Hello. My name's Kaiser. K-A-I-S-E-R.
You have a room for me.
Just a moment. Ah yes, Ms Kaiser. (1) ... for four nights?
That's right.
Would you fill in the (2) ... for me, please?
Mmm. Here you are
Thanks. Here's your (3) ... You're in room (4) ... That's on (5)...
There's a lift just over there. Breakfast is from (6)...
in the restaurant over there.
Great. Thanks very much
(7) „.. Enjoy your stay with us.
Now YOU. Read the dialogue with a partner. Then change the names, times, room number etc. and make a new dialogue.
— More please! D-G
— registration form —key —onthe second floor —> over there oqa ps and tricks
Adverbien sowie often, always, sometimes stehen immer vor einem Vollverb
She often travels in her job.
Unit 2 Travelling for work 21
So. 15. Feb. 16:37 i}

--- Page 14 ---
@ KlettLernen
Bearbeiten
Check-in Training Check-out
Make sentences. Write out your sentences in full.
1 A passenger is a person you check in is the check-in desk.
2 The place in an airport who you can get a coffee or other drink.
3 Acafé isa place " flies by plane.
4 Apassport is a document which you get your baggage when you home.
5 Acheck-in clerk is someone you need to travel abroad.
6 The baggage reclaimis works at a check-in desk.
A passenger is a person who ...
Look at the pictures and give the missing words in the sentences below.
19 26:42 cS eons? seu edit
1 Someone who travels by plane is called a passenger.
2 The place where passengers go first (picture A) is the
3 Here, they get the piece of paper which you can see in picture B.
Its called a
4 Before passengers can board a plane they have to go through a place where people check their clothes and hand luggage
(picture C). This place is called the
5 The people who work here are the
6 Finally, passengers go to the place where they board their plane.
It has a number like A10 or B24 and it's calleda
Look at the pictures on page 22, then complete the sentences below with who, which or where and words you have learned about airports.
1 The person who works at the place in picture A is called a
2 For international flights, passengers also need another document they have to show at the ‘Passkontrolle’. In English, this document is called a
3 There are always places at an airport ... passengers can eat, drink and buy things - A and
4 When passengers board their plane, how do they know which seat to sit in? Well, they find the seat number is on their
5 When passengers arrive at an airport from another country, they get off the plane and then they go to find their baggage. The place ... they do this is called the
6 There is one more thing, too, when you come from another country. People ... are called ... check your baggage when you go through the customs check.
Choose the correct words and phrases to finish the sentences.
1 Lots of famous people stay at this hotel.
2 The hotel's indude a swimming pool and fitness room.
3 You don't have to pay for parking here, it's
4 You can use your laptop here because there's an internet
5 Every bathroom has a and toilet.
6 When you arrive at a hotel, you have to fill ina
7 Then the gives you the for your room.
Below are definitions of some things, places and people in a hotel. What are they? All the words are on pages 20-21.
1 A small metal object which you use to open a door.
2 A form which you fill in when you arrive at a hotel.
3 A place where you sleep. If you are alone, you get a single one of these.
4 The person who welcomes you when you arrive and who checks you into the hotel.
5 The meal which you eat in the morning, probably in the hotel's restaurant.
6 A place in a hotel where you can get an alcoholic drink.
oqa connection facilities receptionist free key registration form shower stay at
So. 15. Feb. 16:37 i}

--- Page 15 ---
@ KlettLernen
Bearbeiten p=
Check-in | Training
In today’s world of work everyone travels more and more.
One day, you will perhaps have to stay at a hotel in an
English-speaking country in your job. So, could you check in?
Give the phrases you need below in English.
You
Guten Morgen. Mein Name ist (Ihr Name).
Sie haben ein Zimmer für mich für zwei
Nächte reserviert.
Good morning. My ...
Mmm. So, bitte schön.
Danke. Gibt es einen Aufzug?
Ah ja, danke. Ich habe Hunger.
Haben Sie ein Restaurant?
Klasse. Vielen Dank.
Work with a partner. Copy the TRAVEL mindmap below, then add 15 more words and phrases yourselves. Report to the class.
by plane to check in by bus gate how? airports
TRAVEL hotels countries single room key Britain
Find the key words and phrases from pages 17- 21 below.
Choose five and write a sentence with each.
MS SINGLEROOMBOAR DINGCARDPASSENGERDUTYF
REESHOPCHECKINDESKHANDBAGGAGEOVERTHEREFACILI
TIEST ARTBAGGAGERECLAIN NTHES DFLOORKE
Mindmaps sind eine gute
Methode, Vokabeln zu sammeln und thematisch zu lernen. In einer Mindmap werden Begriffe rund um ein Thema gesammelt.
Mindmaps können einzelne
Wörter sowie Redewendungen enthalten. So bekommt man einen tollen
Überblick!
Pp
PL
GH v2
RP
OH Q
Aholiday postcard. You're on holiday. Send a postcard to an
American friend. Think of the missing information yourself and finish the postcard below.
Dear(1) 1.2,
Im on holiday in (2) 122. with
(@) . The weather is (4)
The hotel where we are is
(5) . Right now Im (6)
Yesterday we (7)
Best wishes, (8)
Role-play
1 Work ina small group. Look back at the texts and conversations in this unit. Choose some situations which you think are interesting.
They can be at an airport, a hotel, in a shop, in a café, ...
2 Take parts and role-play the situations in your group. Then show the class.
Video Lounge
Jasmine is a PA (personal assistant) in a company in England. Six months ago, two businessmen from Australia, John Carter and Paul Rogers, visited Jasmine’s company and Jasmine looked after them then. Now they are visiting her company again.
Watch the video.
1 Where are Mr Carter and
Mr Rogers when Jasmine meets them?
2 Jasmine asks the men if they have checked in ...
(what?) OK.
3 What does Mr Rogers give
Jasmine? What will she do with it?
Watch again and find the English for:
Schön dich/ Sie wiederzusehen. - Mir geht's gut, danke. Und dir / Ihnen? Kein Problem. - Vielen Dank! Das ist wirklich sehr nett von dir / Ihnen!
Unit 2 Travelling for work 25
So. 15. Feb. 16:37 a x

--- Page 16 ---
@ KlettLernen oo
Bearbeiten
Unit 3
& 8zt7et
—V Check-in | Training
Check-out
A week in England
Read the short text below and answer the questions.
Tobias, Patricia, Iris and Melanie are from Germany. They're apprentices in a German chemicals company and all want to be laboratory technicians. This week they're in England with their trainer, Herr Wolf. Right now, they're visiting a company which makes paint It's called Rolac Paints PLC. They're just arriving at the company. They have an appointment there in a couple of minutes so they're walking quickly.
1 Describe the two pictures opposite. Say who and what you can see, and what's happening.
2 Howare the people walking (quickly? slowly? ...?) Why?
How do you do these things? Finish the sentences for yourself, then compare your answers with a partner and report to the class.
1 In the morning, | usually get up ...
(quite) quickly (very) slowly
2 | usually get to my lessons ...
punctually not very punctually
3 | think I speak English ...
(very) well quite well OK (satistactorily) not too well (quite) badly
In the morning, | get up quite quickly, but my partner Klaas ...
Klaas and I/We both ...
»company —» apprentice —»PLC — quickly — slowiy
— punctually — (quite) well — badly
Am Ende von
Unit3 kann ich: ><
— über Unternehmen schreiben und sprechen,
— andere höflich begrüßen,
— sagen, wie man Dinge macht (schnell, langsam usw.).
Unit 3 Avisitto acompany
27
So. 15. Feb. 16:38

--- Page 17 ---
@ KlettLernen
Bearbeiten
Check-in More please! Check-out
Before their visit, the apprentices read a brochure about Rolac
Paints PLC. Look at this page from the brochure. Find out:
1 How old is the company?
2 How did the company grow in the 1950s and 60s? How important is it today?
3 Where are the company’s head office and main factory?
4 How do many processes in the Rolac factory happen?
5 What different sorts of paint does the company make?
What sorts of people buy them?
About Rolac and the factory
ROLAC PAINTS started in 1876. In the 1950s and 60s, the company grew very quickly and it is now one of the world’s largest manufacturers of paint. Our main factory and our head
5 office are here in England, but we also have factories and offices in the USA, Russia, Australia and China. The factory which you are visiting today is very modern. Many processes happen automatically with computers and robots. But they can't do everything! Over 1,000 people work here, too.
10 Who uses our paint?
Rolac makes many different sorts of paint - for people's homes, for buildings, for cars, lorries and tractors — even for bridges.
So lots of different people buy our paints, from customers in DIY shops to big companies.
15 Today, you can walk slowly around our factory and see exactly how we make our paints. We are very happy that you are here — enjoy your visit!
What are the missing forms?
This old bus is very slow.
But this new bus is quick.
The process is automatic.
Here's an exact diagram of the factory.
It travels
It travels
The process happens
On it, you can see ? how we make our paints.
— head office — factory —togrow — manufacturer — DIY (Do It Yourself) shop
PL
Tobias, Patricia, Iris, Melanie and Herr Wolf are just arriving at
Rolac Paints PLC. Ms Roberts, from the company, is waiting for them at the reception desk. Listen, then read the conversation in a group.
Ms Roberts Herr Wolf? Hello, I'm Christine Roberts.
Herr Wolf Oh, hello, Ms Roberts. Nice to meet you.
Ms Roberts Please, call me Christine.
Herr Wolf And I’m Jan. It's great to be here. Can | introduce our apprentices? This is Melanie Seiler.
Melanie Nice to meet you.
Herr Wolf Tobias Schumann.
Tobias Pleased to meet you, Ms Roberts.
Herr Wolf And Patricia Schwarz and Iris Büchsel.
Patricia Nice to meet you.
Iris Pleased to meet you, Ms Roberts.
Ms Roberts Nice to meet you all, too. OK. Let's go to the cafeteria.
We can have a cup of coffee, then you can look round the factory with me. How's your English by the way?
Apprentices Mmmm!
Herr Wolf | think we all speak English quite well but perhaps you can speak slowly for us?
Ms Roberts Sure. OK, please come this way ...
Now YOU. Work in your groups again. Imagine that you are visiting a company. One of you is a trainer (like Herr Wolf), and one of you is from the company (like Ms Roberts). There are also some apprentices. Write a conversation, then act your conversation for the class. — More please! C
— to introduce s.o. — Nice/ Pleased to meet you (too).
— toimagine
Nice to meet you!
Briten (und Amerikaner) scheinen oft deutlich weniger förmlich zu sein als
Deutsche. Z.B. verwenden sie in der Wirtschaft schnell
Vornamen. Aber: Warte bis dein Gesprachspartner dir dies anbietet! Die Standardbegrüßung ist Nice to meet you, oder Pleased to meet you and die Antwort hierauf ist
Nice/Pleased to meet you, too.
Sich die Hand geben in GB
Briten geben sich seltener die Hand als Deutsche. Es ist in GB nicht üblich, dass sich
Freunde und Arbeitskollegen täglich die Hände schütteln.
Unit3 A visittoa company 29
So. 15. Feb. 16:38

--- Page 18 ---
of I 2 @ xX
Check-in More please! Check-out
10 PART 2: Production and quality control
Ms Roberts: OK. Let's go now to (3) part of the factory, the production area. This is the place where we make the paint. We make it in these big tanks. We do this all automatically. Can you see those people up there, with the (4) ? They're mixing the
15 different powders and chemicals for the different paints. When the paint is ready, something very important happens. It's called
Quality Control. Now, here we are. Oh, hi, Rachel. This is Rachel, everybody. She's a quality control technician. What are you doing at the moment, Rachel?
20 Rachel: Hi. I'm checking some paint. We don't want (5) with our products, so we check all the paints carefully before they go out of the factory.
R The German group is looking around the factory with Ms Roberts.
Here's a plan of the factory. Match the English and the German words.
PART 3: Warehouse and dispatch
25 Ms Roberts: OK, so we have the paint and we know that it's good quality. Now we put the paint into cans and we store it i rr here, in the warehouse. (6) ‚we send the paint to shops or entrance companies. We call this ‘dispatch: This big robot can load the paint quickly and easily onto lorries.
30 PART 4: Research and development and the offices
ER Now listen to Ms Roberts. Look at the plan above. Which parts of hay the factory do they visit first, second, third, ...? CDSs Joop Seren here first. This is the laboratory. This is where we
@n new paints.
35 OK, and finally, here we are again in the offices.
Allthe business and the administrative people work here - the people who (8) the raw materials, (9) the paints, look after the company’s money and so on. So, that's it. | hope
40 you enjoyed your quick tour!
First they go to ..
Then/Next they vis
After that ...
Finally, ...
Gu Listen again. Write down the missing words and phrases.
A29 Compare your answers with a partner.
PART 1: Raw materials
Ms Roberts: OK. Are you all ready? Let's start our factory tour. Making paint begins with the raw materials. We use lots of
5 different powders, water, oils and other chemicals. They all arrive at the factory
0} We store them here, in these big tanks. Every day, we use about (2) kilograms of powder.
PM After the visit to Rolac Paints, Herr Wolf asked the apprentices some questions. Can you answer them? Give the answers in German.
— More please! D-E
1 Welche Rohstoffe benutzt man bei der Herstellung von Farben?
2 Welche Rolle spielen Computer im Herstellungsprozess?
3 Welche Abteilung im Unternehmen ist für die Qualität der Produkte verantwortlich? Warum ist diese Abteilung so wichtig?
4 Wo werden a) die Produkte vor der Abfertigung gelagert und b) neue Produkte entwickelt? Verwende bitte die englischen Begriffe.
5 Welche Rolle spielen die kaufmännischen Angestellten im
Untemehmen? Bitte Beispiele nennen.
— powder —tostore —tank —area —>tomix —toputinto —toloadonto — administrative
Nachste Seite

--- Page 19 ---
@ KlettLernen
Bearbeiten
Check-in Training Check-out
Which is right, a or b?
1 Jim is late for an appointment and he is driving his car very a) quick b) quickly.
2 He doesn't usually drive like that. He normally drives quite a) slow b) slowly.
3 Lots of doors in shops, factories and other places open and close a) automatic b) automatically.
4 They area) automatic b) automatically doors.
5 The meeting starts at 9.00. Please be a) punctual b) punctually.
6 Thisis a very a)good b) well report, thanks.
7 You did this very a)good b) well!
8 | think | speak English quite a) good b)well, but | speak
German better.
9 We lost the football match yesterday. Our team played a) bad b) badly.
40 Don't go to that restaurant. The food is really a) bad b) badly.
Copy and fill in the table, then use the best words from the table
(adjective or adverb) to finish the sentences below.
Adjective Adverb automatic automatically bad badly exact good punctual quick slow
1 Lots of processes in factories today happen automatically because of robots.
2 You speak English very !
3 The company’s new products are very - everyone wants them.
4 | must buy a new computer. My old one is so
5 Sorry, | don’t understand. Could you speak , please?
6 German trains usually arrive ... at the station.
7 Can you give me an description of the man?
8 The roads are covered in snow so don't drive
9 We played ... yesterday and lost the match.
10 Sarah woke up late this morning. She got up, had a shower, and ran out of the house.
Two American businesspeople are just arriving at the offices of a factory in Germany - Mr Ramirez from the USA and his assistant.
Stefanie Dabbert, the German factory manager's assistant, is meeting them. Do task 1 or 2 below.
Task 1
Choose the correct expressions to complete the dialogue. Write out the completed dialogue.
Stefanie Mr Ramirez? Hello, (1) !’m Stefanie Dabbert,
Herr Schenk’s assistant.
Hello, Ms Dabbert. (2)
(3) Kartex GmbH.
Thanks. (4) -(5) my assistant, Megan Turner?
Stefanie Nice to meet you , Ms Turner.
MsTurner (6) ‚Ms Dabbert. But please, (7) Megan.
Stefanie Great, thanks. (8) Stefanie. OK, my boss's office is on the first floor. (9)
Task 2
Complete the dialogue with the correct English words and phrases.
Write out the full dialogue in English.
Stefanie Mr Ramirez? Hello, (1) ich heiße Stefanie Dabbert. I'm
Mr Schenk’s assistant.
Mr Ramirez Hello, Ms Dabbert. (2) Freut mich, Sie kennen zu lernen.
Stefanie (3) Willkommen bei Kartex GmbH.
Mr Ramirez (4) Danke. (5) Es ist schön, hier zu sein. (6) Darf ich meine Assistentin Megan Turner vorstellen?
Stefanie (7) Es freut mich, Sie kennen zu lernen, Frau Turner.
MsTurner (8) Bitte sagen Sie Megan zu mir.
Stefanie Great, thanks. (9) Und ich bin Stefanie. OK. (10) Das
Büro meines Chefs ist im ersten Stock. Bitte kommen Sie hier entlang.
And I'm call me
Can I introduce
Im
It’s great to be here
Nice to meet you
Welcome to
Please come this way
Pleased to meet you too
So. 15. Feb. 16:38

--- Page 20 ---
@ KlettLernen
Bearbeiten
Check-in | Training
Match the English expressions with their German translations.
All the words are about companies.
1 company a Abfertigung
2 factory b Büro
3 office c Büroarbeiter/in
4 cafeteria d erfinden
5 laboratory e Fabrik
6 to invent (a product) f herstellen
7 to make (a product) g Kantine
8 raw materials h Labor
9 warehouse i Lagerhalle
10 quality control j  Qualitätsversicherung
1 dispatch k Roboter
12 robot | Rohstoffe
13 technidan m Techinker/in
14 office worker n Unternehmen
What are these people, places and things? All the words have to do with companies.
1 The place where you go first when you visit a company.
A receptionist works here. The reception desk.
2 The part of the factory where the company manufactures its products.
3 Aplace ina factory where visitors and workers can get a meal or a cup of coffee.
4 A person who works in quality control.
5 Electronic machines which can design products and control processes and which you also use in offices to send emails.
6 The place in a factory where you store products before you dispatch them.
7 A person who buys your product.
Find the correct words and phrases at the bottom of pages 27-31 and complete these sentences. Use the correct forms.
1 l always arrive for my lessons - I'm never late.
2 Sorry, my English isn't very good. Could you speak ‚please?
3 We have factories and offices around the world but our isin
Munich in Germany.
4 If you want to paint your home, you can buy paint in a shop.
5 Can! my colleague Mr Simms?
6 The place where you go into a building is called the
7 We make our products then we them onto lorries and dispatch them.
[O1
BL bi
The apprentices have to write a report for Herr Wolf about their visit to Rolac. You're one of the apprentices. Write a report (about
100 words) in English. Include the following points.
1 What product(s) does the company make?
2 How does the company manufacture its product(s)?
(Describe the main processes.)
3 Did you meet any of the workers at the company?
What was their job?
4 What was the most interesting thing you saw/leamed?
Find out about a company. It can be small or large, in the USA, Japan etc. or in your town. Make a poster.
OH Q
Sehr viele Unternehmen haben Websites in mehreren
Sprachen. Tipp: Vergleiche die englische und die deutsche Website eines
Unternehmens. So kannst
1923 tt customers du leicht die wichtigsten big? famous? Vokabeln lernen.
international?
Video Lounge
Jasmine, an English PA, is looking after two Australian businessmen,
John Carter and Paul Rogers. She is explaining the schedule (the plans) for their visit to her company. Watch and put the plans in the right order.
a taxito the airport EB b visiting the test facilityand I meeting Jim Gibson (the m test manager)
¢ Diane will show them some ideas for the new equipment
(they want to buy) d dinner with Diane and
Mr Harris, the Managing
Director of Jasmine’s company e meeting Chris Fox, the factory manager (with
Jasmine's boss, Diane)
Unit 3 A visit toa company
So. 15. Feb. 16:38 a x

--- Page 21 ---
oo check-in | Training | More please! Check-out
1 Goods in a supermarket
A Read the short text below and answer the questions.
This delivery lorry is delivering goods to a British supermarket.
The truck is delivering food, but supermarkets are often very big and they also sell other things like dothes, electronic goods and books.
Lots of the things are made in Britain, perhaps even in the store.
The bread in many supermarkets is made in a bakery in the store, for example. But lots of other things aren’t from Britain. They are made in other countries around the world.
1 Describe the picture at the top opposite.
2 List some things you can often find in big British supermarkets.
Where are they made?
Goods in supermarkets can come from around the world. Here are some things that you often find in supermarkets. Can you match them to the countries?
Asia
1 Camembert cheese Britain
| think this is made /produced in ... France
2 Pepperoni sausage Italy
3 Hershey's chocolate The USA
4 Electronics goods
| think these are often made in ...
5 Orange marmalade
AmEndevon _
Unit4 kann ich:
ei C Talkin class. Do you have things with you today which are 2 made in another country? Where are those products made? — über internationale
Unternehmen sprechen
I have a .../a pair of .../some ... (in class with me today.) und schreiben,
I think it / the ... is made in... — sagen, wo und wie e I think they/the ... are made in ... Produkte hergestellt
U n it 4 On the label, it say that it (they) is (are) madein ... werden,
I'm not sure where ... is/are made (but | don’t think it’s in — etwas iiber die VorGermany / Europe). und Nachteile der
Global business und Nachle der
— todeliver —+ goods —store —to be made/ produced
A 36 & absant Unit 4 Global business 37

--- Page 22 ---
@ KlettLernen
Bearbeiten
2 Thorben’s new computer r A Readabout Thorben. Why is he happy today? What did he do two weeks ago? What happened this morning?
Thorben Stalke lives in Göttingen. Two weeks ago, he ordered a new computer online, and this morning the computer company delivered it to his flat. The new computer is brilliant - much better than his old one. And it wasn't too expensive. Now he can play games much more quickly and surf the Internet a lot more easily. Thorben is really happy.
r B Thorben's computer is a typical desktop PC. But how does the company make its PCs? Look at the diagram on the next page and answer the questions below.
1 Different parts of the computer are made in different countries.
Where are the monitors made?
They're made in ...
2 What about the mice? Where are they made?
3 Another important part of a computer is the keyboard. Where are the keyboards manufactured?
4 The computer tower is the place where you find all the electronics the hard drive, the motherboard and the CPU (central processing unit), for example. Where are the towers and all the things in them produced?
5 Before customers buy a computer, the company assembles all the different parts - it builds a computer. Where are the company’s computers assembled?
p C Now look at the diagram on the right. How was Thorben’s new computer assembled? Finish the sentences.
1 First, all the parts were made (make) around the world.
2 The parts ... (transport) to Ireland.
3 Thorben’s computer ... (assemble).
4 Next, it .... (transport) to Germany.
5 It. “ee. (tore) i in a warehouse.
6 Finally, the computer ... (deliver) to his flat.
38 — tomanufacture —toproduce —toassemble — to transport parts around
Ireland
"a world ur ae.
assembly > ireland
CPUs > usa towers > China motherboards >
Singapore hard drives > Taiwan pr D Whatare the missing forms?
Das Passiv e please A-C simple present simple past the computer/ it ? made ? produced the monitors /they | ? manufactured ? transported mice > Scotland oqa keyboards > the
Czech Republic monitors > Japan
Unit 4 Global business 39
So. 15. Feb. 16:38 u x

--- Page 23 ---
of ® Ql 2? & x
Check-in More please! Check-out lives 2300 kilometres from Sunil in a town in
Pakistan. He's 10 years old but he doesn’t go to school. He works every day in a small factory. He makes footballs. Amjad can make one football a day. For a football, he eams about one euro.
s Amjad has to work. His family is very poor and they need his money. Around the world today, there are about 250 million - yes,
250 million! - children like Amjad. They work in factories, in mines, and lots work on farms. Big companies in Europe and the USA want to make their products very cheaply. The products (footballs,
1 dothes, trainers, carpets and many other things) are made by children in poor countries like Pakistan. Then they are sold in shops in Europe - where they're often expensive. Globalisation is good for big, global companies. But for Amjad it isn’t so good.
R Readthe three texts below and on the next page. Two are
& for globalisation and one is against. Which are they?
azn is from Kenya in East Africa.
She has a small farm where she grows flowers. She's one of hundreds of small farmers in Kenya who are now flower growers. “The biggest industry in Kenya is growing tea,” Mary
5 says.“But the second biggest is now growing flowers.
Its more important than coffee or tourism.” Mary's flowers aren't sold in Kenya. They're sold in supermarkets in Britain.
They're transported to Britain by plane, and they're on sale RP Finish the sentences with information from the three texts.
in 24 hours. “Globalisation is good for me,” says Mary. 1 Growing flowers is more important in Kenya than
"| can sell my flowers on the 2 Mary’s flowers aren't sold in They're transported to word market” supermarkets in
3 Globalisation is good for Mary because
4 The city of Bangalore changed in the 1980s and 90s when
5 Today, one name for the city is
6 Globalisation is good for Sunil because
7 Amjad can't go to school because
8 There are children like Amjad around the world today.
9 Globalisation is bad for Amjad but good for p Is globalisation good or bad? Write a short text. Use the three er stories as examples, and the useful phrases below. Diese Beispiele der modernen, globalen Geschäftswelt
Globalisation is good for some people but bad for others ... zeigen, warum Englisch is from the city of Bangalore in southern die Weltsprache geworden
India. Bangalore is an old and beautiful city, but in the Useful phrases ist. Wenn beispielsweise
1980s and 90s lots of new buildings were built there. Today, on the one hand ... but on the other (hand) - one reason Chinesen mit Deutschen it's India’s most high-tech city - it's sometimes called the (why globalisation is good/bad) is that ... - another/a second/ Geschafte machen, sprechen
5 ‘Silicon Valley of India’ Like thousands of other young people athird reason ... - for example, + from this we can see sie Englisch. Ohne eine gein Bangalore, Sunil works in a call centre. He’s a computer be 77 that ... + finally, wecan say that ... - on the whole ... meinsame Sprache könnten technician, and every day he talks on a telephone helpline sie sich nicht verständigen.
to people in Britain about their computer problems. Most Pp Give the German for by. Außerdem ist Englisch für of Sunil’s friends also work in call centres for big banks and r Millionen von Menschen
10 other companies in Europe or the USA. "Globalisation is weltweit die offizielle Amtsgood for me,” says Sunil. "We all speak English in India so the » Footballs are often made by children in poor countries. sprache - wie für Mary aus language isn't a problem. | earn a good salary and my life is These products were made by young girls in Pakistan. Kenia und Sunil aus Indien.
much better than the life of my parents.” \ — (one) day —toearn —ontheone hand — on the other
— (tobe) on sale —theworld market —technician fone ] — on the whole je} 40 Unit4 Global business 41

--- Page 24 ---
Checkin | Training Check-out
~ Look at the diagram, then write the active sentences below again
Pp as passive sentences with by.
a Complete the sentences with the verbs in brackets (...).
Use the simple present passive. 1 A Chinese company makes our T-shirts. A
Our Tshirts ... active sentence
1 Lots of products today are made (to make) in Asia. 2 Lots of young people play computer games. Amjad made this football.
2 This cheese (to make) in France. 3 A German company manufactures these cars.
3 All the meat in our supermarkets ... (to produce) on farms in 4 A logistics company delivers our products. passive sentence
Britain. 5 Farmers in France produce this cheese. . .
4 And all our bread .... (to make) in bakeries in our stores. This football eswsesmadelayiey Amjad.
5 First, the bicycles (to manufacture) in our factory.
6 Then the bikes (to store) in our warehouse.
7 Finally, they... (to deliver) to shops where people buy them. I p y = - Copy the table below and write in the past participles (3rd Form) of
Pp Y these irregular verbs. Then write the active sentences below again a Complete the sentences with the verbs in brackets (...). t as passive sentences with by.
Use the simple past passive. ) Condon
| verb past participle verb past participle
1 This old vase was made (to make) in China about 600 years ago. . .
2 | ordered the book online and it (to deliver) yesterday. \ to build built to grow grown
3 The products (to manufacture) in the USA and then they to buy to speak
(to transport) to Europe by sea. es to eat to write
4 Three million tonnes of chocolate (to produce) worldwide last year. 1A farmer in Kenya grew these flowers.
5 It wasa catastrophe. All our products (to store) in a big These flowers were grown by a farmer in Kenya.
warehouse and the warehouse burned down. 2 My dog ate my homework.
3 The Beatles wrote this song.
Pp 4 Millions of people speak English.
A Complete the sentences with the verbs in brackets (. 5 Some students built this model plane.
Use the simple present passive or the simple past passive. 6 A friend bought my old car.
1 The products in a modern supermarket are made (to make) in P many different countries. A Write the active sentences below again as passive sentences
2 10 billion litres of beer (to produce) last year in Germany. with by.
3 Our bread is fresh because it (to make) daily here in our store.
4 | ordered the product online and it (to delivered) the next 1 Farmers in Spain grow these oranges.
day. These oranges are grown by farmers in Spain.
5 This is the last part of the manufacturing process in our factory. 2 Acompany in Taiwan makes our motherboards.
The cars (to assemble) here. 3 A German company built this call centre.
6 Normally, our goods (to transport) by sea but sometimes, 4 Unfortunately, children in poor countries make many everyday when it is urgent, we send them by air. products.
7 Itis amazing to think that this beautiful jewellery (to make) 5 Did you know? A French architect built the Statue of Liberty in over 1,000 years ago. New York.
8 The raw materials for our products (to store) in this 6 A logistics company transports our products.
warehouse. 7 Customers around the world buy our famous German sausages.
8 Millions of people in India speak English as their second language.

--- Page 25 ---
@ KlettLernen
Bearbeiten
Check-in Training
In the pairs of sentences below, one sentence is active and the other is passive. Which is which? Use the verb in brackets (...) to complete both sentences.
1 (to make) a We make these products in our factory.
b These products are made in our factory.
2 (to transport) a In our modern, globalised world, goods around the world.
b Thecompany its products around the world.
3 (to manufacture) a Thetrainers in Asia and then they are sold in Europe.
b An Asian firm the trainers and sells them in Europe.
4 (to write) a My favourite band this song.
b This song ... by my favourite band.
5 (to open) a A famous film star the new store.
b Thestore ... by a famous film star.
Complete the text with the verbs in brackets. Be careful!
Some sentences are active, some are passive.
In our modern, globalised world, goods (1) are manufactured (to manufacture) around the world. Then they (2) (to transport) often thousands of miles and we (3) (to buy) them in our shops.
For people in many countries, globalisation is a good thing.
Countries like India and China now (4) (to make) lots of the products which we (5) (to use) in Europe, and as a consequence, people in those countries are richer. Unfortunately, however, some of those products (6) (to make) by poor children and others who m (to work) in terrible conditions and who (8) (to earn) almost no money for their work.
There is another problem with globalisation, too. When we
(9) (to transport) goods around the world, it is not good for the environment. Until around 50 years ago, most products in our shops (10) (to produce) locally, so they did not need to travel far.
Some people (11) (to think) that we should not buy goods from abroad - especially fresh fruit and vegetables, for example. Products like these which (12) (to grow) locally are much better.
Find the key words and phrases from pages 37-40 below.
Choose three and write a sentence with each.
GO
JSLORRYONTHEONEHAN JRETO
ETOEARNTOBEON SALETOTRANSPORTWORLDMARKET
SAUSAC
LP
GH va
Make a survey in your class then write about the results.
1 How many of the things which you have in class (or at home) were made in Germany? How many were made SOW--4----Inmamaanz a a in another country? Where? Find out about as many things as you can.
2 In class, make a survey and a graph. Then write about the results: IB = made in Germany
About 80 % of our clothes /jeans /trainers were made in another country.
Only about 20% of our clothes were made in Germany.
Over 90 % of all our electronic goods were made in another country / overseas.
Make a poster. Choose one of the ideas below.
1 Find out how something is made and make a poster. Even simple, everyday things like toothpaste are often very complicated! j
Use pictures and words and show a diagram of the process. \
2 FAIRTRADE is an idea to help workers like Amjad in Pakistan and other poor people around the world. Find out more about it on TRANSFAIR the internet and make a poster. FAIRTRADE
Video Lounge
Yesterday, Mr Carter and Mr Rogers visited Jasmine’s company’s test facility.
Jasmine is asking them about their visit. Watch and say if the sentences below are true (T) or false (F). Then watch again and correct the false sentences.
1 John (the older man) thought the visit was very interesting.
2 The two men sawthe computer centre.
3 Jasmine tells Mr Rogers how much the computer centre cost.
4 Paul didn't see the testing equipment for the pumps.
5 The two men stayed at the facility for a couple (= two) hours.
6 After the visit, Jasmine’s boss Diane met the two men and took them to dinner.
7 John doesn't like Italian food very much.
Unit 4 Global business
45
So. 15. Feb. 16:38

--- Page 26 ---
Check-in | Training | More
1 In Christchurch re A Readabout Sven and Daniela and answer the questions.
oF
2 Sven Heiderich and Daniela Stollenwerk are from Germany. They are apprentices with a big German car manufacturer. They are in the marketing department. They usually work in Germany, of course. But their company has offices around the world, and this month they are in Christchurch, on the South Island of New Zealand. It is a brilliant opportunity for them to see a new country and to practise their
English.
1 What do you learn about Christchurch from the text?
2 Describe the two pictures - who and what can you see?
What are Sven and Daniela doing?
Daniela and Sven arrived in New Zealand on 1 January. It's now two weeks later, 15 January. Look at the diagram below and the
NEW Tips and tricks box and finish the sentences. He .
= Now Tips and tricks
@ Christchurch
> 1Jan 5 Jan Since 1 Jan = Zeitpunkt
For two weeks = Zeitraum
South Island
Vorsicht! Auf Deutsch heißen since und for beide ‘seit’!
Daniela and Sven have been in New Zealand ... two weeks.
They ... been there ... 1 January.
ri C Make some sentences about yourself and tell the class.
Am Ende von have been a student at this college since ... Unit5 kann ich: x
I have lived in my hometown for ...
I have ... for/since ... — über Neuseeland reden e und schreiben,
U n it 5 — sagen, seit wann etwas schon andauert, e — wichtige Redewendungen
A month in New Zealand meron
— manufacturer — (marketing) department —for/since je} 46 & pc2spm Unit 5 A month in New Zealand 47

--- Page 27 ---
oF
Ans om) 48
+4,
Check-in “| Training | More please! | Check-out
2 The land of the Kiwis
A Before Daniela and Sven went to New Zealand, they read about the country online. Read the web page and find the best headings A-F for the paragraphs 1-6 in the text.
(en
Yes, kiwis are a kind of fruit. In fact, lots of the kiwis that we eat come from New
Zealand. But a kiwi is also a kind of bird s and it lives only in New Zealand. New
Zealanders use the name of the bird for themselves - as a nickname. They say:
“I'm a Kiwi. I'm from New Zealand.”
2)...
10 White people have lived in New Zealand for around 250 years. The islands were discovered in 1768 by the English explorer Captain
Cook, and many British people came there after him, which is why
English is spoken in New Zealand. But the first people in New
Zealand were the Maoris (who built these famous statues). Maori
15 people have lived in New Zealand for 1,000 years and today they are about 15 per cent of the population of the country.
GB)...
New Zealand isn't a big country. It is a little smaller than Germany.
But it is extremely beautiful with mountains and lakes. Since 2000
20 it has also been famous on screen. The film director Peter Jackson filmed the Lord of the Rings films there, so when you watch the
LOTR movies, you can see many places in New Zealand.
Mann
New Zealanders love sports. There's swimming, skiing, surfing,
25 canoeing, mountain climbing, bungee jumping and lots more.
One of the most popular sports is rugby. Before a match, the New
Zealand rugby team always does a Maori war dance called a ‘haka!
Look online for the dance - it's very dramatic!
> nickname — to discover sth -—» explorer — (film) director
— bungee jumping
RP
Pp
(5) 222
30 New Zealand doesn’t have many big cities. The biggest is Auckland on the North Island with a population of 1.3 million (about a quarter of all the people in New Zealand). It isn’t the capital, however. That is Wellington, also on the North
Island (population 450,000).
35 (6)...
When New Zealanders speak English, they have a Kiwi accent. It is almost the same as the accent of people from Australia. They have some Kiwi words and phrases, too. Hello is G'day (Good day) as in
Australia. On the beach, people often wear jandals, that's flip-flops in
40 British English. And, of course, everyone loves a barbie, a barbecue in the summer (December - March).
B True or false? Correct the false sentences.
1 New Zealanders call themselves Kiwis because that fruit comes from New Zealand.
2 The first inhabitants of New Zealand were the Maoris.
3 New Zealand is a little bigger than Germany.
4 A‘haka’ is a sport that New Zealanders love.
5 The capital of New Zealand isn’t the biggest city.
6 New Zealanders and Australians have a different accent to British people when they speak English.
C Finish the How long ...? sentences about New Zealand.
Then Now
1 Maoris came to New Zealand Maoris live in New Zealand
1,000 years ago. now.
2 The first white people came to White people live in New
New Zealand in the 18th century. Zealand today.
3 New Zealand became famous on The country is famous on screen in 2000. screen today.
D Whatarethe missing forms?
The present perfect with for/since + More please! A-C he/she /it lived here we/you/they |
— population capital —accent —inhabitant
Wellington © Auckland
North Island
Wellington @
® Christchurch
South Island
How long ...?
Maoris have lived in New
Zealand ... 1,000 years.
They ... in New Zealand ...
the 18th century.
It ... famous on screen ... 2000.
Unit 5 Amonthin New Zealand 49
So. 15. Feb. 16:38

--- Page 28 ---
@ KlettLernen
Bearbeiten
BR
Check-in More please! Check-out
Sven and Daniela have to speak English every day in New
Zealand - at work and with the family where they are staying, the
MacKenzies. Look at the three pictures below. Where do you think they are? What are they doing?
You will hear three conversations. Listen and match the conversations (1-3) and the pictures (A-C).
What are the missing phrases in the three conversations?
Note down your answers, then listen again and check.
Mrs MacKenzie (1) some more pancakes, Daniela?
Daniela Yes, please, Mrs MacKenzie. They're delicious.
Mrs MacKenzie Here you are.
Daniela (2)
Mrs MacKenzie Sven? What about you?
Sven They're fantastic, but I'm afraid I'm absolutely full up!
Mr MacKenzie What about some orange juice?
Sven Mmm, yes, please. (3)
Daniela Excuse me, Mrs MacKenzie. (4)
Mrs MacKenzie Sure. What's the problem, Daniela?
Daniela Well, it's really hot in the day but it’s cold at night.
(5) another blanket for my bed, please?
Mrs MacKenzie (6) Come on. Let's get one now.
— pancake(s) —blanket — absolutely (full up) — Let's ...
PL
Ben G'day, guys. How are you this morning?
Sven G'day, Ben. We're fine, thanks.
Ben Hey, listen. Some of us are going to go to the beach after work tomorrow. (7) to come?
Daniela Yeah, cool. Thanks.
Ben Do you have togs?
Sven (8)
Ben Do you have togs?
Sven Sorry, | don't understand. (9) ‘togs’ mean?
Ben Sorry, yeah, it's a Kiwi word. It means, you know, a swimsuit.
Daniela Oh, right. (10) Yes, | have togs.
Sven Me too.
Ben Great. See you then.
Work in small groups. Practise the conversations.
Match the phrases 1-5 with a correct answer A-G. There's sometimes more than one answer.
1 Would you like ...? a It means, you know, ...
2 Here you are. b Of course.
3 Could you help me, please? c Thank you.
4 Couldi...? d Yes, please. That would be nice.
e Cool! Thanks.
f Sure. What's the problem?
g !'mafraid I'm absolutely full up!
5 What does ... mean?
Now YOU. Work in your groups again. Write another conversation, then read it to the class. Use the phrases on these two pages.
Below are some ideas. — More please! D-G breakfast /lunch/dinner toast - coffee - milk - soup - bread - dessert - potatoes
Could you help me, please?
+ phone your parents
+ have a shower
+ borrow some ‘jandals’
+ goto the beach/ cinema with some friends
Pardon?
+ "Did you see the rugby match on TV yesterday?
What did you think of the Haka?”
+ “Kiwis are flightless birds.”
—tomean —Seeyou. —> to borrow oqa
Wenn Deutsche Englisch sprechen, wird es von
Muttersprachlem oft als sehr direkt und vielleicht etwas unhöflich empfunden.
Um diesen Eindruck zu vermeiden, verwende so oft wie möglich die
Ausdrücke Would you like ...?
Could | ... ? Please ... usw.
Unit 5 Amonth in New Zealand 51
So. 15. Feb. 16:38 i}

--- Page 29 ---
@ KlettLernen
Bearbeiten
Check-in | Training
Complete the sentences with since or for.
1 Maoris have lived in New Zealand for 1,000 years but white people have lived there only around 1770.
2 | have lived in my hometown 16 years.
3 How long have you had your laptop?
- last Friday!
4 How long have you been a student at this college?
-I have been here a year and a half.
5 Weare the Richardson family. We came to
New Zealand from Britain and we have lived here now three years.
Make sentences.
1 I/live/here/two years
I have lived here for two years.
2 They/be/at college /8 o'clock this morning
3 1/know/ my best friend / 2009
4 Matt/work/in New York/ the last six months
5 We/have/ this computer / about three years
6 Nicole /be/in our class / January
7 |/learn/ English /1 was 10 years old
In the groups of sentences below, one verb is in the simple present, one in the simple past and one in the present perfect. Complete the sentences with the correct forms.
1 a My family moved (to move) to New Zealand last year.
b We (to live) in New Zealand now.
c We (to live) here since last year.
2 a Saskia (to work) in England for the last three months.
b She (to go) to England three months ago.
c She (to be) in England now.
al (to learn) English at college.
bl (to start) learning English when | was 10 years old.
cl (to learn) English for around seven years.
a We (to buy) our computer in 2013.
b We (to have) our computer since 2013.
c We (to use) the computer every day.
>=
You are staying in England at the moment with the Smith family Mrs Smith, Mr Smith, their daughter Catherine and their son Mike.
Finish the conversations below with the best phrases.
1 MrsSmith Do you like this roast beef? We often have it on
Sundays.
You Yes, it's delicious!
2 Mrs Smith Would you like some more pudding?
You Oh, no , Mrs Smith. I'm
3 You Hi, Mike. ?
Mike Sure, if | can. What do you want to know?
4 You , Mr Smith. Are you busy?
Mr Smith No, not at all. How can | help?
You Well, there’s a football match on TV this evening between Germany and Spain. watch it, please?
Mr Smith Of course. |'ll watch it with you!
5 Catherine I'm going to town this aftemoon. Would you like to come with me?
You
Will, a New Zealand teenager, is staying with you in Germany at the moment. Your parents don’t speak English so they ask you to be their interpeter. Give the English phrases.
Your parents ask ...
1 ob Will mehr Kartoffelsalat haben möchte.
Would you like some more potato salad?
2 ob er mit uns in die Stadt fahren möchte.
3 ob er seine Eltem anrufen möchte.
4 Will möchte uns um etwas bitten, aber wir verstehen nicht, worum es geht. Wie können wir ihm helfen?
5 Will hat mich gestem um ein zweites Kopfkissen (pillow) gebeten.
Hier ist es, bitte schön.
6 ob Will jetzt satt ist.
could 1...?
could you help me, please?
excuse me full up thanks that would be great yes, please delicious

--- Page 30 ---
@ KlettLernen
Bearbeiten p=
Check-in | Training
When you are in another country there are often things you don’t understand. Dirk is in the States at the moment. Right now he's talking to Luke, a high school student. Write their conversation again in the right order.
Dirk
Great, thanks. And you?
Sorry, | don't understand. What does ‘airhead’ mean?
Oh right. | understand now.
Pardon?
Luke Hey, Dirk. How's it going?
Dirk ...
An English-speaking friend is in Germany with you. She speaks a little German but doesn’t understand the expressions below. Can you explain in English? Choose three and write a short explanation.
Use your dictionary if necessary and the useful phrases below.
1 eine ‘3’ (Note) 4 eine Fahrkarte abstempeln
2 Du spinnst! 5 Wurstbude
3 Geisterfahrer 6 ferngucken
It means (that) ...
Its a person who .../a place where
You have to do this when you ...
In Germany, when we do a test we get a grade from... to ...
very good/good/ satisfactory (average) / sufficient /poor/ unsatisfactory (you fail)
Find the correct words and phrases at the bottom of pages 47-51 and complete these sentences. Use the correct forms.
1 ‘Marketingabteilung’ means in English.
2 Captain Cook was a famous He Australia and
New Zealand.
3 The of Germany is around 82 million. That means it has
82 million
4 You speak English really well - you have almost no German
5 | can't eat another thing. I'm absolutely
6 Can ... your dictionary, please?
- Sure, but don't forget to give it back!
vs
RP
You have a friend in New Zealand who wants to know about
Germany and where you live. Look at the map and the FAST FACTS box and write a short text (100-150 words). There are some phrases below to help you.
Hi... (name of your friend)
You wanted to know about Germany.
I live in ... (town/city) which is in the north/south/...
I have lived here for ... years /since .../all my life
My hometown is big/small/has a population of ...
My country has a population of ... GERMANY Fast Facts
It has been one country ... 1989. Before that it was divided .
into West and East Germany. Population 82,490,000
New Zealand has lots of mountains and lakes. Germany is ... Capital Berlin, 3,327,000
In Germany we speak ... but we all learn English at school. [eee German
In Germany people like (sports /food/ entertainment). My favourite ... is... Currency Euro
History ‘1 country since 1989
Geography Flat in north, mountains in south
Video Lounge
It's the last day of Mr Rogers's and Mr Carter's visit. Jasmine is saying goodbye.
Watch the video.
1 How are the men travelling to the airport?
2 How long is the journey normally from the office to the airport?
3 Why can the journey be different on Fridays?
4 What is the last thing
Jasmine says at the end?
Watch again and find the
English for:
Es war schön, dich/ Sie wiederzusehen.
Ich bin froh, dass es dir/\hnen gefallen hat (= dein/ Ihr Besuch).
Bis bald, hoffe ich.
Tschüs. Pass auf dich auf!
Unit 5 Amonth in NewZealand 55
So. 15. Feb. 16:38

--- Page 31 ---
oo
—V check-in | Training | More please! Check-out
1 Earn while you learn re A Read about Lara and answer the questions.
The girl in the picture opposite is Lara Summers. She lives in
England and she's 16 years old. At the end of this school year, Lara will take her GCSE exams - those are the exams that pupils take at16 in all the basic subjects like English and maths. But Lara isn’t sure what she would like to do after that. Today, she’s talking to one of the teachers at her school, Mr Anderson, who gives the pupils advice about careers.
1 What do you learn in the text about education in England?
2 Describe the picture in detail - who? where? what? why?
re B Mr Anderson listened to Lara and made some notes, then he + .
gave her some advice. Look at the Tips and tricks box and finish Tips and tricks what he said below. If-sentences type 2
If Lara stayed at school, she would be unhappy.
IF + simple past/ would
“OK, Lara. You want to leave school and to earn money straight away. But you also want a a good job, so you need some training.
Well, what about an apprenticeship? There are lots of good jobs in the beauty industry. If you did (do) an apprenticeship, you
2... (get) a qualification and you ... (eam) money, too. Earn Am Ende von while you learn!” Unit 6 kann ich: > <
— iiber Lehrstellen sprechen und schreiben, e — aneinem
U n it 6 Vorstellungsgesprach teilnehmen,
. . — — sagen, was passieren
A renti cesh | S — GCSE (General Certificate of Secondary Education) würde, wenn ...
p p p —totakeanexam — (to give sb.)advice — straight away
— todo an apprenticeship om) 56 & adds] Unit 6 Apprenticeships 57
Nachste Seite

--- Page 32 ---
@ KlettLernen
Bearbeiten
A216
20
30
Check-in More please! Check-out
Imagine that you did an apprenticeship in England. The text below is from a UK government brochure about apprenticeships. Read it and do the tasks on the next page.
APPRENTICESHIPS: earn while you learn
What are apprenticeships?
Anyone who is 16 or older can do an apprenticeship. Apprenticeships last between one and four years. Apprentices work alongside experienced tradespeople to leam the skills they need for their job and while they learn, they earn a basic wage. They also study, usually one day a week at a vocational college, and at the end of their training they get a qualification. A typical apprentice works a minimum of 30 hours per week. Because apprentices are employees, they get paid holidays (a minumum of 20 days per year plus national holidays).
Why do an apprenticeship?
Doing an apprenticeship means that you:
* earn money while you learn
- get paid holidays
- get good practical training
+ get real qualifications.
Research also shows that people who begin their career with an apprenticeship earn more in their lifetime than a person without training.
Types of apprenticeships
There are apprenticeships in many different industries and you can be an apprentice with a large, national company or a small local one.
At the moment, there are 1,400 different jobs in England where it is possible to do an apprenticeship. The apprenticeship you choose depends on your interests, your ability, and the opportunities in your part of the country.
How do I find an apprenticeship?
There is a national database in England for apprenticeships. Go to our apprenticeship website and register your name. You can then find, read about, and apply for apprenticeships directly.
— experienced —tradesperson/people —skill(s) — local (company) - to apply for sth.
True or false? Correct the false sentences.
1 If you did an apprenticeship in England, it would normally last five years.
2 You wouldn't earn any money.
3 You would normally spend one day a week at college.
4 You would get at least 20 days a year holiday and you would be paid while you were on holiday.
5 If you did an English apprenticeship, you would work for one of the country’s largest companies.
6 If you wanted an apprenticeship, you would normally write to some companies in your part of the country.
Here are some definitions. What word(s) do they define? All the words were in the text.
1 A person who does an apprenticeship. an apprentice
2 Acertificate etc. which shows that you finished your training successfully.
3 The days in the year when you don't have to work or study.
4 Another word for ‘firm’
5 The things you are interested in are your ....
6 Information which is stored on a computer.
What do you know about jobs? Look at these jobs. How many sentences can you make? Use your dictionary if necessary.
+ Where would you work?
+ What would you do in your job?
+ What sort of people would you meet?
+ What places (countries etc.) would you perhaps travel to?
Ifi were a... If |worked asa ..., I would...
What are the missing forms?
. (be) a travel guide, you
(need) English if you ...?
.. (meet) lots of tourists.
(work) for this company.
If you .
You .
—tobepaid —tolast(5years) — (what) sort of (?) — to need (English)
OH Q
Unit 6 Apprenticeships
So. 15. Feb. 16:38 oy

--- Page 33 ---
@ KlettLernen
Bearbeiten
RP
Check-in More please! Check-out
Meryem Gulec is from Bremen and after college she would like to become a flight attendant. Last week she saw this advertisement in a magazine. She wrote her CV and sent it to Mr Werner. Look at the CV now and answer the questions below. — More please! D
AIR DEUTSCHLAND currently has a number of TRAINEESHIPS for flight attendants, check-in clerks, computer technicians and sales people. For further information, please contact Heiko Werner,
Personnel Manager, on
1 Where in Bremen does Meryem live?
2 Where did she go to primary school?
3 When did she start and finish secondary school?
4 What qualification did she get at the end of secondary school?
5 Where does she go to college and what qualification does she want to get there?
6 Does Meryem have a part-time job? What does she do?
7 What computer programs can she use?
8 How well does she speak Turkish? And English?
9 What does she like doing in her free time?
CURRICULUM VITAE
Personal details
Name: Meryem Gulec
Address: Findorffstraße 20
28215 Bremen
Date of birth: 1998
Education and qualifications
Primary school: 2003-2007 Grundschule Burgdamm, Bremen
Secondary school: 2007-2013 Schulzentrum Findorff, Bremen
Qualification: Fachoberschulreife
College: 2013- Berufskolleg Findorff
Studying for qualification as Kauffrau für
Touristik und Freizeit (“Management Assistant for Tourism and Leisure)
Work experience: 2014- Part-time job at Hapag-Lloyd Travel Agents, Bremen
Computer skills: Microsoft Word and Excel, social media
Languages: German (fluent), Turkish (mother tongue), English (good)
Interests: Travel, making clothes, singing
— flight attendant — CV (Curriculum Vitae) —tocontactsb. -> traineeship — work experience
A2ı7
It's one month later, and Meryem is having a job interview at
Air Deutschland with Mr Werner. You'll hear three parts of the interview. Listen and answer the questions.
First, Mr Werner asks Meryem some questions about her CV. Listen and choose the correct answer a, b or c.
1 Meryem loves 3 Meryem sings in a going to airports. a a dub for young people.
b flying. b a rock band.
c staying in hotels. c her bathroom at home.
2 Two years ago she flew to a London.
b the USA.
c Turkey.
Mr Werner is talking to Meryem now about the work of a flight attendant. Listen and finish the sentences.
1 Meryem thinks that she would be a good flight attendant because
- she loves travel and ...
- she also likes ...
- she also likes being ...
2 If Meryem worked for Air Deutschland, she would only be at home ...
Listen to the end of Meryem’s interview with Mr Werner.
True or false? Note down T or F.
1 If Meryem got the traineeship, her training would last six months.
2 She would be in Bremen the first month.
3 After that, she would fly on normal flights but she wouldn't work as a flight attendant.
4 Mr Werner will contact Meryem tomorrow about the traineeship.
Talk in class. What do YOU think? Did Meryem give good answers in her interview? Why (not)? Do you think that she will get the traineeship? — More please! E
Unit 6 Apprenticeships
61
So. 15. Feb. 16:38

--- Page 34 ---
@ KlettLernen
Bearbeiten
Check-in Training Check-out
Match the sentence halves.
If | had lots of money,
If | lived in England,
If you were a nurse,
If you were an IT expert, a he would get better marks at school.
b you would perhaps meet Marie.
c | would speak English every day.
d | would travel round the world.
If you came to my party, e they would give us our money back.
If Josh worked harder, f you would repair computers.
If we wrote to the company, g you would work in a hospital.
nau>suns
Complete the sentences with the correct forms of the verbs in brackets (...). Remember: if-sentences can begin with the if-part or the main clause (Hauptsatz)!
1 If | had (have) a job, | (earn) money.
21 (earn) money if! (have) a job.
3 If you (work) as a tour guide, you (travel) a lot.
4 You ... (travel) a lot if you ... (be) a tour guide.
5 If she (do) an apprenticeship, she (learn) about a job from experienced tradespeople.
6 She (earn) money, too, if she (do) an apprenticeship.
7 Paul hates school. He ... (be) very unhappy if he... (stay) here.
8 But if Christine (stay) at school, she (love) it.
Look at the pictures below and answer the questions on the next page with whole sentences.
20
1 Where (in what city) would you be if you saw the Eiffel Tower?
I would be in... ifl....
2 If you saw the Brandenburg Gate, where would you be?
3 What would you eat ifyou went to the restaurant in picture 3?
4 What wouldn’t you do if you saw the sign in picture 4?
5 What would you be if you had the job of the person in picture 5?
A good way to spend time in an English-speaking country is to become an au pair. But what do you know about au pairs?
Read the brochure below and answer the questions with whole sentences. Use if-sentences type 2.
Being an au pair is a great way to travel, learn about another country, and improve your English.
We have au pair jobs in England and the USA.
In the past, au pairs were always women, but today there are au pair jobs for men too.
What are the requirements?
To be an au pair you must:
+ be aged between 17 and 27 (18 and 27 in the USA)
+ be single (not married)
- have a passport in your country
+ like children and want to learn about another country
- be ready to live for a minimum of 6 months in another country.
What do au pairs do?
Au pairs work a maximum of 25 hours a week. During this time, they look after children and do light housework such as cleaning.
How much do au pairs earn?
For the work they do, au pairs earn on average €80 a month. They also live free with their host family - they get a room in the family’s house and eat with the family. Au pairs pay their own travel costs from their country to Britain or the USA.
What do au pairs do in their free time?
Most au pairs take the chance to go to a language school while they are in the country. They sometimes meet other au pairs in their town, too - we give you the addresses of other au pairs. Almost all au pairs also travel around the country to see other regions and to visit interesting places.
1 Where would you live if you were an au pair?
If you were an au pair, you ...
2 How much would you earn if you had an au pair job?
3 Would you meet other au pairs if you worked as an au pair?
4 What work would you have to do if you were an au pair?
5 If you had an au pair job, what sorts of things would you be able to (could you) do in your free time?
OH Q
Die would-Form von can ist entweder would be able to oder could.
So. 15. Feb. 16:38 oy

--- Page 35 ---
@ KlettLernen
Bearbeiten
Check-in | Training
CURRICULUM VITAE
Personal details Rl
Name: Andrew Michael West
Address: 23 Grove Park Avenue
Danbury DB3 4NR
Date of birth: 1997
RI
Education and qualifications
Primary school: 2003-2008 Danbury Primary School
Secondary school: 2008-2013 Danbury Comprehensive
Qualifications: GCSEs in English, maths,history, French, science, IT
College: 2013- Danbury FE College
Studying for a qualification in IT
Work experience 2010-2011 Worked 12 months part-time at Freshco
Supermarket, Danbury
2012 Work placement at Danbury Software Ltd. (3 weeks)
Skills: Computer programming, French (average)
Interests: Snowboarding, canoeing, football, computer gaming
Above you can see the CV of a young British student. Make and answer questions about it. Use the simple past.
1 when/Andy/born?
When was Andy born? He was born in 1997
2 where/go/to primary school? RP
3 where /go/to secondary school?
4 what/GCSEs / get /at secondary school?
5 when/start college?
6 where /work/ in 2010 to 2011?
7 when/do/work placement / at Danbury Software Ltd.?
Find the correct words and phrases at the bottom of pages 57-60 and complete these sentences. Use the correct forms.
11 my GCSE exams last year.
2 | don't know what to do. Can you give me some
3 He has been a mechanic for 20 years, so he is very
4 The company is in my hometown. It’s a company.
5 Howlong ... apprenticeships in England ... ?
- Between one and four years.
6 What car do you have? - An old VW Beetle.
7 You can me on this number.
8 The people who bring you food and drinks on an aeroplane are called
‚please?
Write your CV in English. Look at Meryem’s CV on page 60 for ideas.
You can organise a gallery walk in class afterwards. If possible, use a computer and print out your CV. Think carefully about layout and headings. — Skills 5
Write about 100 words about the cartoon below. Compare your answer with a partner then report to the class.
- Who are the people?
- What is happening?
+ What do you think? What would an interviewer say if someone did this?
tm fine thanks.
Im just having a job interview.
How are you?
Video Lounge
Maya decided last week that she would like to do a work placement in a hotel in Germany. Now she is having an interview with the hotel manager,
Mr McFarlane - and he is a little scary! Watch the episode and answer the questions.
1 What must Maya send
Mr McFarlane before her interview?
2 Why does Maya want to work in a hotel?
And why in Germany?
4 What must you ‘always remember’ when you work in a hotel?
5 What would Maya like to do in the next five years?
6 What mistake does Maya make near the end of the interview?
7 Where (in what city) will she work?
OH Q
Unit 6 Apprer
So. 15. Feb. 16:39 a x

--- Page 36 ---
@ KlettLernen oo
Bearbeiten
Unit 7
© 79y2dm
RI
—V Check-in | Training
More please! Check-out
This is me at work!
Read about Connor and Brandon and answer the questions.
After years at school, Connor (top) and Brandon, two English teenagers, are finally at work. They both have apprenticeships,
Connor as an industrial electrician and Brandon as an administrative assistant in an office. Both apprenticeships will last three years. Do the two young men like being apprentices? This is what they said:
Connor: | decided to do an apprenticeship in my last year at school and | really like working. For me, learning ‘on the job’ is brilliant.
Brandon: | always wanted to work in an office and now here | am!
And of course | love eaming money!
1 How long will Connor and Brandon be apprentices and what jobs do they hope to get afterwards?
2 Find three reasons why Connor and Brandon like doing their apprenticeships.
Read the Tips and tricks box and finish these sentences with the correct forms of the verbs in brackets.
1 | love... (to be) an apprentice.
2 I decided ... (todo) an apprenticeship last year.
3 Do you like ... (to learn) English?
4 What do you want ... (to do) after college?
-I want... (to do) an apprenticehip.
Write some more sentences like those in task B and read them tothe dass.
Hove ...
Last year/ week / weekend | decided...
I (don't) like ...
One day /After college I want...
— finally —to decide (todo sth.) — brilliant
' Tips and tricks
Auf einige Verben in Englisch folgt ein Infinitiv, auf andere eine ing-Form. Beispiele:
to decide/to want + Infinitiv
(to do) to like/to love + ing-Form
(doing)
Am Ende von
Unit7 kann ich: x
— über Arbeiten und
Arbeitsstellen sprechen und schreiben,
— Ausdrücke wie to want to do sth und to like doing sth richtig verwenden.
Unit 7 Starting work 67
So. 15. Feb. 16:39
26 Pacaceoseara

--- Page 37 ---
@ KlettLernen
Bearbeiten
RAP
A290
Check-in More please! Check-out
This is Holly. She is also English and she also has an apprenticeship.
She is a trainee retail assistant in a store which is part ofa large national chain. She is talking about her apprenticeship and being at work for the first time.
Listen and put the pictures A-F below in the correct order.
Compare with a partner and report to the class.
The first picture is picture ...
— retail —manager —till — display (to display) — logistics
Listen again and choose the correct answer a, b or c.
1 Holly will be an apprentice for another a year.
b two years.
c four years.
2 Holly decided to go into retail work a last year b in her last year at school.
c when she was a child.
3 Holly says that working ina store is ... than she expected.
a easier b more interesting c more complicated
4 Holly says that goods on display in a shop must look attractive and a not be too expensive.
5 Holly says that logistics are
... for retail businesses.
a quite important b extremely important c not that important
6 Holly finds advertising and marketing a really interesting.
b simple.
c notas interesting as other aspects of her work.
7 Holly wants a to stay in her store for many years.
b to try other jobs before she finally chooses retail work.
¢ to become a manager one day.
b not be too close together.
c be easy to find.
Here are some sentences that
Holly said. Look at grammar section 13 at the back of your book and complete the sentences with the correct forms of the verbs (infinitive or ing-form). — More please! A- D
1 And, of course, | love shopping (to shop).
2 First, you have to learn
(to operate) the tills.
3 | hate (to go) into shops where you can never find what you want.
4 That means (to order) goods,
(to deliver) them to stores.
warehouses, and then
5 | want (to stay) in retail
(to become) a manager.
(to store) them in work and one day I would like
— complicated —to operate sth — aspect (of sth)
OH Q
Unit7 Starting work
69
So. 15. Feb. 16:39 a x

--- Page 38 ---
@ KlettLernen
Bearbeiten
A220
70
Check-in 1 Training
More pl
3 Starting work
Check-out
You find this article in a magazine. Read it and do the tasks on page 71.
Starting work: our top tips
Your first days at work are the start of a new part of your life. You're no longer at school (although you may be an apprentice who goes to college one or
5 two days a week), you're now ‘a worker’, someone with a job and best of all, a wage. It's exciting but you probably feel abit nervous, too - after all, there will be many things that are new and strange at
1 first. So here are our top tips for those first days at work.
1 Sleep well
You need to be wide awake on your first day. There will be a lot to learn and
15 remember, so make sure you get a good night's sleep. Then make sure you sleep
‘well for the first weeks after that. Having ajob and working means having anew routine, very different from your routine at
20 school or college. And expect to be tired at first: you will find the work quite hard when you start working every day
2 Have the right clothes
Different jobs mean different clothes,
25 maybe even a uniform, and there aren't many jobs where jeans and a T-shirt are the right thing to wear. Find out what is right in your new workplace
3 Practise travelling to your job
30 You don't want to be late on your first day, so do the journey to your new workplace a couple of times before you start. Traffic can be bad first thing in the moming and the journey can take longer than you expect.
35
40
45
Don't be late on your first day!
It's no good telling your new boss your bus was late — all the other workers arrived at work on time.
4 Smile
Its that big moment when you enter your new workplace for the very first time. Take a deep breath and smile. First impressions last along time so you want to look friendly and enthusiastic when people meet you. And dont forget to be polite - to everyone.
5 If you don't know something, ask
Youre here to learn to do a job and one important way to do that is to ask questions. Don't be afraid to ask
People know that you are new -andan apprentice. As someone once said: "There's no such thing as a stupid question.” The more you ask, the more you will learn.
—tomean —toexpect — traffic — (first) impression(s) — there's no such thing (as)
RI
6 Be reliable ss Of all the qualities that employers look for in anew worker, at the top of the list is usually that they are ‘reliable’. You're at work, remember, not on holiday with your friends. Be punctual for everything: arrive
60 on time in the morning, don't come back late after lunch, be on time for meetings
Do the work that people give you as well as you can (and if there’s a problem, ask for help). And if you promise to do
6s something, do it. Try to be a person who people can trust
7 Learn to get on with people
If all goes well, you will work in your job for a long time and you will see the same
70 people every day. In every workplace there are sometimes problems and very often these are problems with co-workers
Get to know people and learn to get on to the class. — More please! E-G
OH Q well with them. Talking and listening
75 are always the best answer. If there’s a problem you can't solve like that, then talk to someone who can help. As an apprentice, you normally have a'mentor’
Try to find solutions. Conflict is never the so right answer.
m)
Conflict is never the best way to solve problems!
A True or false? Write down T or F. Compare with a partner and report
1 According to the article, starting work will mean many changes in your life and at first, working will be quite hard.
2 You can usually wear what you want at work.
3 Bosses usually understand if you have a problem (e.g. with traffic) when you come to work in the morning.
4 The writer of the article says that people get an idea about us when they first meet us and they have this idea for a long time.
5 According to the text, we should try not to ask too many questions at work because people will find us ‘stupid’
6 In the opinion of the writer, one of the most important things at work is that people leam to trust you.
7 What should you do if you have a problem at work with a coworker? The writer says you should go first to your boss or
‘mentor’ for help.
m B Your friend plans to start a new job soon and is interested in this article - but (s)he doesn’t speak English very well. Give the main ideas of the text in German.
> reliable —(to be)ontime —to trust sb.
with sb. —to solve (a problem) —> mentor
> to get on (well)
Unit 7 Starting work
So. 15. Feb. 16:39 oy

--- Page 39 ---
@ KlettLernen
Bearbeiten
Check-in Training Check-out
Copy the table and write in the ing-forms of the verbs.
Verb ing-form Verb ing-form towork working to learn todo doing to go to write to operate tocut to sit to play to stay tolisten to deliver to begin to travel todie to tie
Use the ing-forms from your table in task A to complete these sentences. You don't need to use all the verbs.
1 I like learning English.
2 But! don't like homework.
3 I like to music.
4 At the weekend, | like in bed in the morning.
5 I don't like to the dentist.
6 Do you like football?
7 Nike by train but buses are boring.
Choose the correct form of the verb to complete the sentences.
1 I love to be/being an apprentice.
2 When | leave college, | want to get/ getting an apprenticeship in a retail store.
3 | hate to get/ getting up in the morning.
4 One day | would like to have/ having my own company.
5 You have to learn to do/ doing lots of new things when you first start work.
6 When did you decide to do/ doing an apprenticeship?
7 You want to do/ doing well in your exams, right? Well, that means to work / working hard in all your lessons.
8 | like to play/ playing football, but | prefer to play/ playing tennis.
Complete the sentences with the correct forms of the verbs. Be careful of spellings.
1 This is Will. He is also doing a retail apprenticeship. He didn't like being (to be) at school, but he likes (to work) and of course he loves (to have) money in his pocket at the end of the month.
2 Will always wanted (to work) in a shop, even when he was a kid.
3 He decided (to do) an apprenticeship two years ago.
4 Asan apprentice, Willis learning ... (to do) lots of new things.
5 Inhis free time, Will enjoys (to listen) to music so he really likes (to work) in the music section of the big department store where he is an apprentice.
6 He likes (to travel) so the in-store travel agengy is also interesting for him.
7 Will's managers are really pleased with him and one day, Will would like (to become) a manager himself. That means
(to put in) a lot of effort every day and always (to do) his best.
1 Choose the correct form of the verb to finish these sentences.
In one sentence both forms are possible.
a Listen, please. You need to remember / remembering this.
b You can't expect to be / being successful in life if you don't work hard.
When did you start to work / working here?
d Where do you want to work /working when you finish your apprenticeship? Would you like to stay /staying here?
e It's no good to say/ saying you don’t know what to do. You can always ask me for help.
f Don't forget to put/ putting the lights off when you leave the office.
g If you promise to do/ doing something, then you must do it.
h I'm trying to understand/ understand this, but it's really hard.
2 Now finish these sentences with the correct form of the verb.
a Tomorrow, you'll leam ... (to use) our computer network.
b Do you like ... (to use) computers?
c Why did you decide ... (to work) here?
d What do you enjoy ... (to do) in your free time?
So. 15. Feb. 16:39

--- Page 40 ---
@ KlettLernen
Bearbeiten
Check-in | Training —\ More please!
pF Verbs + infinitive, verbs + ing-form — Grammar 13
A Complete the sentences with the correct forms of the verbs. Be careful of spellings!
1 Now that! havea job, | can afford... (to buy) a car.
2 I'm afraid! can’t stand ... (to watch) football on TV.
3 Why did you choose ... (to do) an apprenticeship?
4 My teacher suggested ... (to work) part-time to get some work experience.
5 One day, | hope ... (to travel) to the USA.
6 If you practise ... (to write) sentences like these, you will soon learn
+++ (to use) verbs with infinitives and ing-forms.
7 She is a vegetarian. She gave up ... (to eat) meat a year ago.
8 There's no point in... (to go) to the gym tomorrow. It will be closed.
eG Verbs + infinitive, verbs + ing-form — Grammar 13
Aa Finish these sentences in your own words and with your own ideas.
1 Ilove... 6 | often forget ...
2 I also enjoy ... 7 I can't imagine ...
3 I don't mind ... 8 | think everyone should try ...
4 But | hate ... 9 There's no point in ...
5 One day, | want...
ae H Key words
A Find the correct words and phrases at the bottom of pages 67-71 and complete these sentences. The words that you need are not in the same order as on the pages!
1 You can pay for these goods at the ... over there.
2 What's your first ... of the new apprentice?
3 It’s important to be ...: always be on time, and if you promise to do something, always do it.
4 Leave the house early today -the ... on the motorway is really bad this morning.
5 ... is’Einzelhandel’ in German.
6 Your window _... looks very good. | think lots of customers will come into the shop when they see it.
7 I didn't... to see Mike at the party. It was a big surprise.
8 First, second, next, then, and „..!
5 Now you pt A Choose one of the activities below.
1 Make a word web about ‘work’ You can do this in a small group and produce a poster to show to the class with a gallery walk. There are some ideas below to get you started.
office worker shop
Jobs Workplaces
WORK
Working People conditions
Feelings hours of work manager nervous
2 Work with a partner. Write a conversation about a job that you had a part time job, for example, or a short work placement. Read your conversation to the class. Please look now at page 77.
w Video Lounge Starting a new job
RP Maya is starting her work placement at the hotel in Berlin.
Watch and answer the questions.
1 Whois the first person
Maya meets at the hotel?
2 When does Mr Xiao want to stay at the hotel?
3 What sort of room would he like?
4 What does Maya forget to do inher conversation with Mr Xiao?
5 She calls him back and he gives her some details.
Note down this information.
6 What does Maya give 2 the man atthe end?
OH Q
So. 15. Feb. 16:39 oy

--- Page 41 ---
@  KlettLernen Bearbeiten So. 15. Feb. 16:39 oo
Partner files »b page: fest
PARTNER FILES
Unit 7 [5 Now you]
Make a conversation with your partner about a job that you had. Youcan use the role cards below, but if you had a real job, you can talk about that.
1 Choose one of the role cards below.
2 Copy the table below the role cards and complete it with information from your role card (or about your real job).
3 Prepare questions for your partner, then interview her/him and make notes.
When/Where did you...?
What sorts of things did you do?
How did you feel?/What did you learn?
3 Write a conversation in which you take it in turns to ask and talk about your job.
4 Read your conversation to the dass.
ROLE CARDA
In your summer holidays last year you had a part time job for five weeks in a supermarket. You worked four days a week from o'clock until 6 o'clock in the aftemoon. You were a checkout assistant - that means you worked at a checkout where customers pay for their goods. You were often tired at first and sometimes you didn’t want to go to work in your holidays, but your co-workers were really friendly and you made some new friends. It was also good to leam about the world of work. And the money which you earned was great! You would like to work there again, perhaps next Christmas.
ROLE CARD B
Last October you had a work placement for two weeks in a multiplex cinema.
You worked six days a week in the afternoon or evening each day. You saw lots of different parts of work in a cinema - in the box office (where they sell tickets), in the shop (where they sell popcorn tc.), in the projection room
(where there is the projector which shows the films) and in the office (where they look after the cinema's money, advertise the films, etc.). You found the work experience fascinating and you learned a lot about the real world of work. It was also good working in a team with other people. Now you would love to work in a cinema one day.
Partner files winen/how eng! ;
where? ?
Job pages rove dap tasks at work? ?
Test Teelogs end eperancnt 1?
learn? ?
76 Partner files 77 eB8c0s088e—0

--- Page 42 ---
@ KlettLernen
Bearbeiten
RP
A221
RP
Partner files Test
People use the phone all the time at work and even if you work in
Germany, many phone calls today are in English. Dominik Hamann is a German businessman. He is at the airport in Germany on his way to London on a business trip. He is calling three business contacts in
England before he flies.
Here is the list of people who Mr Hamann wants to speak to and their companies. Listen to the three conversations. What happens?
Can he speak to the people or is there perhaps a problem?
Now listen again to the three conversations and note down the missing words and phrases.
Conversation 1
Hamann
Good morning. (1) David James, please?
It's Dominik Hamann from HB Exports in
Germany.
Hi, David. (3) . I'm at the airport in Germany.
| just wanted to give you a quick call before | arrive in England ...
PL
Conversation 2
Hamann
Hello. Can | speak to Liz Williams, please? This is
Dominik Hamann from HB Exports in Germany.
Sure. Thanks.
Conversation 3
Hamann
Good morning. Can | speak to Pete Marsh, please?
IM call back later, thanks.
Yes, it's Dominik Hamann from HB Exports in Germany.
Thanks. Bye now.
Now YOU. Work in small groups to make your own conversations.
1 Copy and complete the diagram below with the key phrases from the three conversations. Compare your diagrams in class. Make sure you know the German meanings of all the phrases (you can make a list of English and German phrases side by side).
2 In your group, choose two of the conversations above and write your own. Invent names, company names, etc. yourselves.
3 Read your conversations to the class - or record them and play the recordings.
Receptionist: Good morning ...
Caller: Could | speak to ...
Receptionist: One moment ... Receptionist: I'm sorry ...
OH Q
Receptionist: I'm sorry ...
So. 15. Feb. 16:39 i}

--- Page 43 ---
Ba kiett ® Q i'l 2? & x
\| Partner files —T Job pages
Preparing for a meeting (nit 2) C/D. Equipment.
When people make a presentation or want to explain something, they need equipment - like the whiteboard in a classroom.
Another piece of equipment can be a flipchart like the one in this picture. ln modem offices, there is also often digital equipment like multi-media projectors (what you call ‘beamers’ in Germany) and a screen. And finally many companies nowadays have video conferences with cameras and microphones and a large video screen
This is Amrit Dhillon, an admin assistant in a company in Scotland.
The company makes and sells clothing. Amrit has many different tasks as an admin assistant. One of them is preparing for the meetings that take place in the company’s offices. So what does she have to do? How do you prepare for a meeting?
r A Lookat the picture below and read the notes below and on the next page.
E. Refreshments.
So now there is a room, the necessary documents,and equipment for presentations. The last thing that is needed is refreshments coffee, water, fruit juices, maybe also biscuits. People work better when they have nice refreshments!
p B Describe the picture on the opposite page. What is happening?
What can you see?
The picture shows some people who are ina meeting.
They are sitting .../One man is ...
He is making a ...
On the left/ the right you can see ...
In the centre/foreground/...
On the table ...
p C Last week, Amrit got this email from her boss, Richard. Read the email and make a to-do list for Amrit. Put the things she has to do in what you think is the right order.
A. A meeting room. Hi Amrit i mrit has I want to have a meeting next week with my sales team.
It will last about three hours on Wednesday morning if there is a room free (start at 9.30 am). I'll send you the agenda tomorrow. There'll also be some handouts for everyone. I want to make a presentation at the meeting - the information etc. I need is on my laptop. One last thing, it's
Harry Martin's birthday on Wednesday so some cakes or similar would be nice. Thanks!
B. Documents.
The most important document for a meeting is the agenda and this is normally sent to people before the meeting. In the meeting Richard itself, there can also be handouts - enough copies, of course, for everyone.

--- Page 44 ---
Bearbeiten
@ KlettLernen
| Partnerfites —\ Job pages | Test
Business correspondence 1: an enquiry (unit 3)
Germany is famous for its precision engineering. Otto Wolff
Gartengeräte GmbH, which is based in Wuppertal, makes a range of garden equipment including lawn mowers. The firm exports its products around the world but one of its biggest markets is Great
Britain - the British love gardening! Grigori Skorikov (below) works in Wolff's EU export department. Today he has an email from a
British company. The email is an enquiry.
r,p A You can see the email on the next page. Look at it now. Copy and u B Grigori’s boss is Frau Lindner. She is the manager of the EU export om) 82 complete the table below with information from the email.
ENQUIRY: received 21 March 20...
company name ?
address / country ?
writer's name ?
company’s business ?
(what does the company do?) size of company ?
What WOLFF product(s) ?
is the writer interested in?
send (information / catalogue etc.)
Liebe Frau Lindner, heute haben wir eine department. Write a short email to her in German in which you summarise the key points of the enquiry.
am C Look carefully at the ema
E-Mail von ... erhalten.
OH Q
Von: c.mitchell@swallows-gardencentres.co...uk
An: info@wolffgarten...de
Betreff: Enquiry
Dear Sirs
We saw your lawnmowers at the trade fair in London last week and would like further information.
Swallows Garden Centres Ltd is a company based in Oxford in the south of England. We are a national chain of over 30 garden centres around Britain. You can visit our website and find out more about us at www.swallows-gardencentres.co...uk.
If your prices are competitive, we may want to buy quantities of your products for our garden centres. Please send us your current catalogue and price list. We would also like to know about any discounts that you can offer us, your terms of payment, and how quickly you can deliver quantity orders.
Ilook forward to hearing from you soon.
Yours sincerely
Charlotte Mitchell - Purchasing Manager
Swallows Garden Centres Ltd, 75 Banbury Road, Oxford OX1 3)J ind make a list of phrases that you can use in an enquiry. There are some phrases below to get you started.
Give the German translations for your phrases, then compare your lists in class.
Dear Sirs Sehr geehrte Damen und Herren,
We saw your products at a Wir haben Ihre Produkte auf trade fair/on your website. einer Messe / auf Ihrer Webseite gesehen.
Wir hätten gem weitere
Informationen.
We would like further information.
Weare a... (company) ... Wir sind ein ... Unternehmen
(country) in...
If your prices are competitive, we may want to order quantities of your products.
D Now YOU. Work with a partner or in a small group. You are a German supermarket chain. Last week you saw some
English biscuits at a trade fair in Cologne and would like more information about them. The English firm’s email address is info@wilsonsbiscuits.co. . .uk. Write an email enquiry.
Job pages
83
So. 15. Feb. 16:39 oy

--- Page 45 ---
@ KlettLernen
Bearbeiten
RP
Partner files Test
Grigori Skorikov works for a company in Wuppertal which makes and sells garden machines. Yesterday, he received an enquiry from a chain of garden centres in Britain. They wanted details about
Grigori’s firm's lawnmowers. Today, Grigori is writing a reply. He is making the British company an offer.
You can see Grigori’s email on the next page. Look at it now and at the box below and say if the statements are true or false. Correct the false statements.
Understanding offers
Incoterms
Diese Klauseln werden im internationalen Handel verwendet und sagen dir, was ein Preis beinhaltet. DDP steht für Delivered Duty Paid’ (Geliefert verzollt) - der Preis beinhaltet die Lieferung zum Lager des Käufers und jedwede
Einfuhrsteuer.
Discounts
Firmen gewähren oft Rabatte, wenn ein Käufer mehr als eine bestimmte Menge an Waren kauft: ein ,Mengenrabatt.
Terms of payment
Diese sind von Bedeutung, wenn der Käufer für die Waren zahlt, z.B. wenn er/sie bestellt oder innerhalb von 30 Tagen nach Erhalt der Rechnung.
Valid for ...
Wie lange das Angebot unverändert bleibt.
1 Grigori sends Wolff's catalogue and price list by post to the firm in
England.
2 The English company must pay the cost of transporting the goods from Germany to Oxford.
3 If the English firm buys more than 50 lawnmowers, they will pay less than the normal price.
4 The English firm can pay for the lawnmowers when they arrive at their warehouse in Oxford.
5 The English firm will get the lawnmowers ten days after they order them.
6 The English firm doesn’t have to buy lawnmowers immediately.
The prices and conditions will stay the same for three months.
An: c.mitchell@swallows-gardencentres.co...uk
Betreff: Your enquiry
Dear Ms Mitchell
Many thanks for your enquiry of 21 March about our lawnmowers. We are pleased to make you the following offer.
Attached are our product catalogue and current price list as PDF documents. All our prices are DDP Oxford. We can offer you a volume discount of 5% on all orders over 50 items. For first orders we normally require payment in full with your order. We will dispatch your order within 10 working days of receipt of your payment.
This offer is valid for three months.
Thank you again for your interest in our products and I look forward to receiving your order.
Yours sincerely
Grigori Skorikov
EU export department
Otto Wolff Gartengeräte GmbH
An der Seilbahn 35
42105 Wuppertal
Germany
You work in the offices in a company in Germany which makes aromatic wax candles. Your boss, Frau Thönes, received an enquiry yesterday from a large store in London and wants to reply to the store with an offer. Frau Thönes gives you these notes. Write the email.
oqa
Job pages 85
So. 15. Feb. 16:39 i}

--- Page 46 ---
of? x
Partner files
A British company called Swallows Garden Centres is thinking of buying some lawnmowers from a firm in Germany called Otto
Wolff Gartengerate. A couple of days ago, Charlotte Mitchell, the purchasing manager at Swallows, received an offer from Wolff. She decides to buy some lawnmowers and today she is sending an order.
She completes a purchase order form and writes a letter to send with it.
Ss Swallows Garden Centres
LOWS Garden CHEF: m A Lookat Charlotte's letter and the order form on the last page.
. Find the English for the following German words and phrases.
PURCHASE ORDER No. 1249 Zn Be careful! Sometimes the answer can be an abbreviation
(Abkürzung).
Date: 23 March 20.. CATNo. ITEM QTY PRICE AMOUNT
RM100 Large lawn mower 10 450 4,500 1 Datum
Otto Wolff GmbH RMS5O Medium lawn mower 20 250 5,000 2 Katalog (Nummer)
An der Seilbahn 35 RM25 Small lawn mower 50 125 6,250 3 Menge
42105 Wuppertal SUBTOTAL 15,750 4 Zwischensumme
Germany LESS 5% QUANTITY DISCOUNT 787.50 5 anbei finden Sie
TOTALE 14,962.50 6 wir stellen fest, dass
7 wir haben Ihnen heute einen Betrag von ... überwiesen
Dear Mr Skorikov 8 innerhalb von 10 Tagen nach unserem Zahlungseingang
9 Mit freundlichen Grüßen
Purchase order No. 1249
Thank you for your offer of 21 March. Please find enclosed our purchase order. pi Now YOU. Work in a small group. You work for a large German a —— department store. Last month you saw some British clothing at
We note that your prices include a 5% quantity discount for a trade fair. It is made by a firm called Glasgow Mill in Glasgow, orders over 50 items and that the prices are DDP Oxford,
England. We also note that for a first order you require payment in full with our order and we have today made a bank transfer to trousers, etc.). Write a letter and fill out a purchase order (think you of €14,962.50. of the items and prices yourselves). Below you can see what the
The consignment will be dispatched within 10 days of receipt of British firm offered you. Your contact is Mrs Linda MacDonald.
our payment.
Scotland. You wrote an enquiry to them and got an offer last week.
Now you want to order some clothes (shirts, pullovers, dresses,
+ all prices DDP Dusseldorf
Yours sincerely + quantity discount on orders over €50,000
Charlotte Mitchell payment in full with first order
Charlotte Mitchell + dispatch within 30 days of receipt of order
Purchasing Manager
Encl: Purchase order No. 1249 om) 86 Jobpages 87

--- Page 47 ---
@ KlettLernen
Bearbeiten
RP
Partner files Test
In March this year, Grigori Skorikov’s company Otto Wolff
Gartengeräte began selling lawnmowers to a British company,
Swallows Garden Centres Ltd. Over the next three months, all went very well and Swallows bought many more mowers. But today Grigori has an email from his contact in the British company,
Charlotte Mitchell. There is a problem. The email is a complaint.
Look at Charlotte Mitchell's email. You are Grigori. Write a short email in German to your boss Frau Lindner in which you explain the problem.
If your firm makes a mistake (like Grigori's), here are some tips.
Look at the tips and at Grigori’s email. Why did Grigori write certain things? What phrases did he use?
Complaints: What to do
Things can go wrong in business. It's normal!
- If it’s your mistake, accept responsibility.
+ Apologise (say sorry) - more than once if necessary.
- Give a reason for your mistake (say what happened).
- Tell your customer dearly what to do (send back the goods, keep/ destroy the goods etc.).
- You don't want to lose your customer, so (if you can) offer them something extra. ‘Good will’ is very, very important in business.
What Grigori does Phrase(s)
He accepts responsibility. It's clearly our fault
RPL
Von: c.mitchell@swallows-gardencentres.co...uk
An: g.skorikov@ottowolff...de
Betreff: Our order number 4464
Dear Grigori
I'm writing about our order number 4464. The consignment arrived yesterday but when we unpacked the container we found that it contained the wrong goods: there were lots of garden tools but no lawnmowers. This is a real problem for us as June is one of our busiest months in our centres.
Could you therefore please send us replacements very urgently and let us know what you would like us to do with the tools?
Kind regards
Charlotte
An: c.mitchell@swallows-gardencentres.co...uk
Betreff: Your order number 4464
Dear Charlotte
I'm extremely sorry to hear there was a mistake with your order number 4464. It’s clearly our fault. We're always careful with our orders but this time there was a mix up in our dispatch department. Please accept my apologies.
I’m today dispatching your order again by express carrier.
It should arrive tomorrow afternoon.
Please return the faulty container to us at our expense. In addition, please also accept a 30% discount on your next order with us to show our good will.
Please let me know when the new order arrives and once again, sorry for our mistake.
Kind regards
Grigori
Now YOU. Work with a partner. You work for different companies, one in Germany and one in another country (Britain, the
Netherlands, the USA etc.). Write and exchange emails - think of the details yourselves.
oqa
Job pages 89
So. 15. Feb. 16:39 i}

--- Page 48 ---
@ KlettLernen
Bearbeiten
So. 15. Feb. 16:39
Bi ia)
90
\| Partner files ~T Job pages
Understanding advertisements (unit 7)
Holly is an apprentice in an electrical store in England. It is called
Homestore and for the next two weeks her store will have a promotion - they will sell lots of products on special offer. This weekend, Homestore will put a leaflet in all the local papers to advertise the promotion. You can see the leaflet on the next page.
Save up to
A Witha partner, look at the leaflet and the notes HOW AN
ADVERTISING LEAFLET WORKS below. Then use the phrases to explain how the leaflet ‘works’. Give a short talk to the class.
HOW AN ADVERTISING LEAFLET WORKS
Do you need a new cooker?
Is your old fridge, well, old!?
How about a new, bigger TV or one of the latest vacuum cleaners?
We have hundreds of products in store at LOW, LOW prices! You could save £300!
But hurry! Offers end on 31 March.
Britain's favourite electrical store
We're open
Weekdays 8 am— 8 pm
Sunday 9 am — 4 pm
First, the leaflet must ‘grab attention’. Homestore does this with ...
Homestore wants people to be interested in the promotion and it uses ... to do this.
The writer of the leaflet speaks directly to the readers. For example, ... GG Visit uson Facebookt
So what must the reader do? The leaflet gives ... es
B Now YOU. Work in small groups to write a leaflet for a product
(or service) that you know about. Use the techniques above and present your leaflet to the dass.
Job pages 91

--- Page 49 ---
@ = KlettLernen
Bearbeiten
92
| Partner files sb pages —1 Test
TEST
1 Reading
You find this article in an English language magazine. Read the text and do the tasks which follow.
What do you think? Who would get the job?
OK, you don't have to be a genius to answer that question. If you went to an interview with an employer in a baseball cap, you most probably wouldn't get the job - or only if it was as a baseball player. But there are lots more dos and don'ts for job interviews.
This month we give you
15 hot tips for the perfect job interview!
Before the interview..
1 Do xk as you can ax for cı job. The its stores and |
Even better, for any company nowadays, there is it.
2 y where the int ing late for aj
Ju can, practis view that traffic com b f the
3 warys to prepare for an interview is the intervi ray ask you r lik
At the interview...
5 Don't be late! In fact, plan to arrive early - 15-20 minut cry even if this mear utside u don’t hav bu ir, and if you area and your friends may your k n't you have to wait arn an, simple cloth:
ur pink hair in your nose, but
First impre aportant. 5 interview rr tive and frier osit do he n't at home during ths
Hi! I'm here for the job interview.
10 Answer the questions but don't talk too much. The interviewer i t arough and if 20 ost always end an intervie
Juestions for me?’ Prepar smile again, and leave the
605 words
Read the statements below. Write down if a statement is true (T), false (F), or that the information is not in the text (NIT).
1 Itis not generally a good idea to wear a baseball cap for a job interview.
2 Listing possible questions is OK but not the best way to prepare for an interview.
3 When you first meet the interviewer you should say ‘hello’ and use their name.
4 Aninterviewer will get a bad impression of you if you don't look at her or him directly.
5 Two to three minutes is the perfect length for your answers to interview questions.
6 You must never tell a lie in an interview.
7 You may look stupid if you tell an interviewer that you don’t understand a question.
8 It isn't just interviewers who can ask questions, a candidate can often ask them, too.
Complete the sentences with information from the text.
1 One of the best ways to find out about a company before an interview is to look ...
2 You must know where to go for your interview and if possible ...
3 Itis always better to arrive ... for an interview than to arrive late.
4 The right clothes are important but ... are important, too.
5 It is important to answer questions but you mustn't ...
6 People are often nervous in interviews - that’s normal. However, you must still be careful to...
7 The last things to do at the end of the interview are to...
— upright: aufrecht — to impress sb: jmdn beeindrucken
Test 93

--- Page 50 ---
@ KlettLernen
Bearbeiten
Partnerfiles | Job pages
You will hear part of a radio programme from New Zealand called
Jobs around the world. The presenter, Mike Smith, is interviewing two young people from Germany. You will hear each interview twice.
Listen to the interview with Julia Lammert and choose the right answer a,b, c or d.
1 Julia is a a kindergarten teacher.
b an electrician.
c acarpenter.
d a policewoman.
2 She chose her job because a her dadis a carpenter.
b she loved making things as a kid.
c it was the idea of one of her teachers.
d her boyfriend is a policeman.
3 After Julia left school a she went to college full-time.
b she got a job.
c she was unemployed.
d she got an apprenticeship and went to college part-time.
4 What do her friends think about her job?
a They were surprised at first but now they think it's great.
b They think she's crazy.
c They all say:"You must do what you want” d They think it’s a bad idea.
5 If Julia hadn't chosen this job, she would maybe have become a a fashion model.
b asecretary.
c a fashion designer.
d ashop assistant.
Listen to the interview with Hasan Samsek. True or false? Write down T or F.
1 Hasan is a care worker who looks after disabled people.
2 At school, he didn’t want to be a care worker.
3 After he finished school, he was an apprentice electrician.
4 He wanted to become a care worker after a visit to a care home with his class at school.
5 He believes that men are better care workers than women.
— disabled: behindert
You work for a company in Germany called Labortek which manufactures laboratory equipment - microscopes, for example.
Next week, there will be a visit to your company by some American businesspeople. Below you can see some information about your company. Make notes of the key points in English: you needn’t write full sentences.
Firmenname Labortek GmbH
Hauptsitz und Werk Fulda, Deutschland
Branche Herstellung von Laborausstattung
Geschichte begann 1911, wuchs sehr schnell in den 1960ern und 70ern, jetzt Europas größter Hersteller von Laboraussstattung
Internationale in 16 Ländern weltweit
Firmensitze
Angestellte (Deutschland) 1.800; (weltweit) 2500
Choose ONE of the tasks below.
1 You are applying to an international company in Germany for an apprenticeship. As part of your application, the firm wants a text of around 150 words about you.Write the text. In it, say:
+ your name, age and where you live
+ how long you have lived there
+ where you are at college and something about your typical day there
+ your interests and hobbies in your free time
+ the job you want to have in the future and two reasons why you want that job
2 You work in a large hotel in Germany. You regularly buy jams
(Konfitüren) from a company in England. Your contact in the
English company is the export manager, James Ryan (email:j.ryan@ toptreejams.co...uk). Normally, the jams arrive quickly and safely, but last week, all the jam jars in the package were broken. Write an email to James to complain about the consignment. Include the following points:
+ subject of the email (Betreff)
+ a suitable beginning
+ the order number for the jams
+ exactly what happened
+ why this is a problem for you
+ you would like replacements
+ a suitable ending to the email
Test 95
So. 15. Feb. 16:39

--- Page 51 ---
oo
—T Grammar summary Skills files Vocabulary
GRAMMAR SUMMARY
1 Das simple present
A Allgemein
| go to college five days a week. 2) of
I live in Germany.
Das simple present wird verwendet:
- für Aussagen, die längere Zeit gültig sind,
+ um auszudrücken, was jemand regelmäßig tut.
B Mit sometimes, often usw. | usually get up at 7 a.m.
Da man mit dem simple present ausdriickt, was man regelmäßig tut, wird es oft mit Wörtern wie usually, | often watch TV in the evenings.
normally, sometimes, often, always, never verwendet.
Diese Wörter (Adverbien) stehen immer:
- vor einem Vollverb, I'm always happy on Fridays.
- nach to be.
Cc Bildung: Aussagen
Das simple present wird aus der Grundform des Verbs. a towork b to finish
(Infinitiv ohne to) gebildet. Nach he/she/it endet das Verb
. | work I finish immer auf s oder es! he/she /it works | he/she/it finishes
. ar . we work we finish a Andie meisten Verben wird einfach -s angehängt. you work you finish b Die Endung -es wird bei Verben benutzt, die auf s, ss, x, they work they finish ch, oder sh enden (z.B. to finish), da es schwer wäre, nur ein -s auszusprechen. ¢ togo d to tidy c Auch to go und to do enden mit -es.
. ; . Igo I tidy d Ein Sonderfall sind Verben, die auf y enden: ick to tidy — he tidies. he/she /it goes he/she /it tidies we go we tidy you go you tidy
An hang D Bildung: Fragen und Verneinungen they go they tidy
+ Fragen im simple present werden mit do
Grammar summary . Vemenungen let man it art ce oor, ore ven
S ki | Is fi | es vorsicht Do I work? | don’t work
Nach does/ doesn’t kommt immer die Grundform Does he/she /it work? | he /she/ it doesn't work
Do we work? we don't work des Verbs: :
oca u a ry Does he work? (! Does he werks?) DOyaUWOrEZ Bauldoni Work
She doesn't work. (! She doesn’t works.) Do they work? they don't work
(om) 96 Anhang Grammar summary 97
Nachste Seite

--- Page 52 ---
Skills files Vocabulary
Allgemein
Das present continuous benutzt man für Aktivitäten, die gerade im Augenblick des Sprechens stattfinden. Oder auch um ein Bild zu beschreiben. Es wird häufig mit Zeitangaben wie at the moment und right now verwendet.
Mit this week, this month usw.
Das present continuous kann auch für längere, befristete
Handlungen verwendet werden, die gerade stattfinden, benutzt werden, z.B. this week, this month.
Bildung: Aussagen
Das present continuous wird mit to be und Verb + -ing gebildet.
Im I'm not working he’s/she's/it's she isn’t working were working ‚Am working?
you're Are you working?
they're Are they working?
Bildung: Fragen und Verneinungen
Fragen und Verneinungen werden mit den Frage- und
Verneinungsformen von to be gebildet.
Verb + -ing: Schreibregeln
- An die meisten Verben wird einfach -ing angehängt:
work - working, do - doing.
+ Verben, die auf -e enden, verlieren das -e:
use - using, dance - dancing.
Kurze Verben, die auf einen Vokal und einen Konsonanten
(außer -y, -w und -x) enden, verdoppeln den Konsonanten:
cut - cutting (aber play - playing).
Längere Verben, die auf einen Vokal und einen
Konsonanten enden, verdoppeln den Konsonanten nicht:
visit - visiting, deliver - delivering.
(Ausnahmen: travelling, beginning)
Bei Verben, die auf -ie enden, wird
„ie zu -y: die - dying
I'm reading this text at the moment.
What can you see in this photo?
- A hairdresser. Right now, she's cutting a customer's hair.
We're visiting some friends in
England this week.
Julia is learning English on a course in London.
This is Patrick. He lives in
England. He goes to an FE college five days a week.
It's 830 in the morning. Patrick is going to college by bus.
Allgemein
Das simple past wird verwendet, um Ereignisse in der
Vergangenheit zu schildern, die jetzt abgeschlossen sind. Es wird häufig mit Zeitangaben wie then, in 1970, last week und 30 years ago benutzt.
Bildung: Aussagen
Regelmäßige Verben bilden das simple past mit «ed.
Diese Form bleibt in allen Personen gleich.
Unregelmäßige Verben haben Sonderformen im simple past (eine Liste findest du auf dem
Klappumschlag). Diese Formen (außer bei to be) bleiben ebenfalls in allen Personen gleich.
Bildung: Fragen und Verneinungen
- Fragen im simple past werden in allen Personen mit did gebildet.
+ Vemeinungen bildet man durchgehend mit didn’t.
to be bildet Fragen und Verneinungen im simple past mit eigenen Formen.
Nach did/ didn't steht immer die Grundform des Verbs:
Did he work? (! Did he worked?)
She didn't work. (! She didn't worked.)
Verb + -ed: Schreibregeln
+ An die meisten Verben wird einfach -ed angehängt:
work - worked.
+ An Verben, die auf -eenden, hängt man nur dan:
use - used, dance - danced.
Kurze Verben, die auf einen Vokal (a, e, i 0, u) und einen
Konsonanten (außer -y, -w und -x) enden, verdoppeln den Konsonanten: shop - shopped, jog - jogged.
Längere Verben, die auf einen Vokal und einen
Konsonanten enden, verdoppeln den Konsonanten nicht:
visit - visited, deliver - delivered. (Ausnahme: travelled)
Bei Verben, die auf -yenden, wird -y zu ;i: study studied.
| bought them yesterday in town.
Cool shorts, Gary.
Where did you get them?
to work togo tobe
I worked I went I was he worked he went hewas she worked she went she was it worked it went itwas we worked we went we were you worked you went you were they worked they went they were
Did I work?
Did he/she/it work?
Did we work?
Did you work?
Did they work?
Was 1?
Was he/she/it?
Were we /you/they?
I didn't work he/she/it didn't work we didn't work you didn’t work they didn’t work wasn't he/she/it wasn't we/you/they/weren’t
Anhang Grammar summary 99
So. 15. Feb. 16:39

--- Page 53 ---
@ KlettLernen
Bearbeiten
100
Skills files Vocabulary
How long has Julie had that electric guitar? For about
Allgemein
Mit dem present perfect und since/for kann man ‘Wie lange'-Fragen (How long ...?) beantworten.
+ Since wird mit einem Zeitpunkt (z.B. 2001, 3 January, last year) benutzt.
+ For verwendet man für einen Zeitraum (z.B. two years, six months).
Bildung: Aussagen
Das present perfect wird mit to have und der 3. Form
(Partizip Perfekt) gebildet.
- Regelmäßige Verben (wie to work) bilden ihre 3. Form mit -ed.
+ Unregelmäßige Verben (wie to go) haben Sonderformen, die in der Liste auf dem Klappumschlag zu finden sind.
Bildung: Fragen und Verneinungen
Fragen und Verneinungen werden mit Frage- und Vemeinungsformen von to have + 3. Form des Verbs gebildet.
Allgemein
Das past perfect wird fiir ein Ereignis in der Vergangenheit verwendet, das noch vor einem zweiten Ereignis in der
Vergangenheit stattfand. Für das länger zurückliegende
Ereignis verwendet man das past perfect, für das nicht ganz so lange zurückliegende das simple past. Wir verwenden das past perfect häufig mit after.
Bildung
Das past perfect wird mit had + 3. Form (Partizip Perfekt) des
Verbs gebildet. Fragen werden auch mit had, Verneinungen mit hadn't gebildet.
After Jamie had run in the marathon, he went home and went to sleep!
two days.
I have (I've) he has (he’s) she has (she's) it has (it’s) we have (we've) you have (you've) they have (they've) worked gone
Have you worked?
Has he worked?
| haven't worked he/she / it hasn't worked we/you/they haven't worked
She chose her job after she had visited an interesting company.
I had worked I hadn't worked he/she/it had he/she/it hadn't worked worked we/you/they had | we/you/they worked hadn't worked
Had | worked?
Had he/she /it worked?
Had we/ you/ they worked?
Allgemein
Will wird fiir feststehende Ereignisse in der Zukunft sowie fiir Vorhersagen und Vermutungen verwendet.
Bildung
+ Aussagen werden mit will + Grundform des Verbs gebildet. Die Kurzform (7) wird fast immer beim
Sprechen und häufig auch beim Schreiben verwendet.
+ Fragen bildet man, indem man will und das Subjekt tauscht. Hier sind die Kurzformen nicht möglich.
+ Verneinungen werden mit won't + Grundform des Verbs gebildet.
Allgemein
Going to verwendet man, um über Pläne und Vorhaben zu sprechen: I'm going to buy a new jacket entspricht etwa auf
Deutsch: „Ich habe vor, eine neue Jacke zu kaufen.“
+ Aussagen bildet man mit to be + going to + Hauptverb.
+ Fragen bildet man mit den Frageformen von to be + going to + Hauptverb.
+ Für Verneinungen benutzt man die Verneinung von to be + going to + Hauptverb.
Will und going to
It won't rain tomorrow.
When I'm big, I'm going to be a footballer!
I'll have a family in 10 years.
She won't leave her job when she has a family.
I will (I'l) come Will | come?
he will (he'll) come Will he come?
she will (shell) come | Will she come?
it will (it'll) come Will it come?
we will (we'll) come | Will we come?
you will (you'll) come | Will you come?
they will (they'll) come | Will they come?
| won't come he/she /it won't come we/you/ they won't come
I'm going to move to a new apartment next month.
Are you going to leave home?
I'm he's/she's/it's we're / you're / they're
Am!
Is he/she /it
Are we / you/ they
I'm not he/she/it isn’t we/you/ they aren't going to | work going to | work?
going to | work
Anhang Grammar summary 101

--- Page 54 ---
@ KlettLernen
Bearbeiten
102
Skills files Vocabulary
Allgemein
Mit den modalen Hilfsverben must, have to, mustn’t und don't /doesn't have to wird ausgedrückt, was man tun muss, nicht tun darf und nicht zu tun braucht (nicht tun muss).
+ don’t/ doesn’t have to
He doesn't have to drive!
He has a driver.
+ must/have to + mustn't
In England you must / You mustn't drive on have to drive on the left. the right!
Must und have to haben etwa Mustn't drückt aus, was man
Don't/ Doesn't have to drückt aus, nicht darf. was man nicht zu tun braucht.
mustn't bedeutet don't have to = nicht nicht ‚nicht müssen”. müssen die gleiche Bedeutung. Sie drücken aus, was man tun muss.
Bildung: must und have to
Imustgo | have to go he/she/it must go he/she /it has to go we/you/they must | we/you/they have
- Must bleibt in allen Personen gleich. Auf must folgt die Grundform des Verbs.
Have to bildet man mit to have + Grundform des Verbs.
go to go
Bildung: mustn’t
Mustn't bleibt ebenfalls bei allen Personen gleich. Imustn’t
Auf mustn't folgt die Grundform des Verbs. he/she /it mustn't go we /you/they mustn't
Bildung: don’t / doesn't have to
. ; A P I don't have to
Die Verneinungsform von have to bildet man mit = 2 dont /doesn't have to + Grundform des Verbs. ioe ee Rider pave oa 59 we /you/they don’t have to oqa
Allgemein
Ein Bedingungssatz besteht aus einem if-Teil und einem Hauptsatz. Der if-Teil beschreibt eine Bedingung und der Hauptsatz drückt aus, was passieren wird oder passieren könnte (oder hätte passieren können), wenn diese Bedingung erfüllt wird.
Bedingungssätze können entweder mit dem if-Teil oder mit dem Hauptsatz beginnen. Wenn der if-Teil beginnt, steht immer ein Komma vor dem Hauptsatz.
Es gibt drei Grundtypen von if-Sätzen: Typ 1,2 und 3.
Hf-Satze Typ1:
If you ask the robot, it will clean the house.
+ Typ 1 drückt aus, was unter bestimmten Bedingungen in der Zukunft geschehen wird oder nicht geschehen wird. _!f you go to the party, | you'll see Mitch.
If-Sätze Typ 2:
If | worked for that company, | would need a good qualification.
+ Wir benutzen Typ 2, um über eventuelle Situationen zu sprechen oder wenn du zweifelst, dass eine Bedingung !fyou went to the party, you would see erfüllbar ist. Mitch.
‚Anders als im Deutschen darf would nur im
Hauptsatz, nicht im if-Teil stehen.
If-Sätze Typ 3:
If he had stayed on the streets, he would have died.
+ Typ 3 schildert Ereignisse in der Vergangenheit, die hätten passieren können - die aber nicht passiert sind.
If you had gone | you would have seen to the party, Mitch.
Sorry,Me Davis that's the wrong answer if youhad said ’B, you would have won
€500,000.But you said ‘C’
If youget this answer right,
Mr Davis, youl win €500,000.
But if you get it wrong, you'll lose everything.
What would you do
SS ifyou had €500,000?
Typ 1: Fiir Sachen, die Typ 2: Für imaginäre, schwer Typ 3: Für Sachen, die hätten passieren werden, wenn ... vorstellbare Situationen passieren können
Anhang Grammar summary 103
So. 15. Feb. 16:40

--- Page 55 ---
So. 15. Feb. 16:40 ofp ® Q
| 2 @ xX
Skills files
Vocabulary
Allgemein: Aktiv- und Passivsatze
Allgemein
- Aktivsatze betonen, wer etwas tut. Passivsätze betonen, Subjekt Verb Objekt + Adjektive beschreiben Personen und Sachen. Sie stehen a big robot was getan wird - die Handlung steht im Vordergrund. The man bought the flowers. meist vor einem Substantiv oder nach to be. The robot is big.
+ In Kickoff Foundation findest du nur Aktivsätze. In einem + Adverbien sagen etwas über Verben aus. Inn
Aktivsatz steht das Subjekt vor dem Verb. Gibt es ein Sie sagen uns, wie etwas passiert _
Objekt, so steht dieses nach dem Verb.
+ Passivsätze kann man als ‚umgedrehte’ Aktivsätze The man bought the flowers.
ansehen: Das Objekt des Aktivsatzes wird zum Subjekt Adverbien: Bildung des Passivsatzes.
chews were bought TENENENBEN - Ein Adverb wird gebildet, indem +yan das Adjektiv angehängt wird. A :
- Bei Adjektiven mit der Endung -y wird das -y zu -ily. = See
Bildung . Die idol zu -ly. simple simply
+ -icwird zu -ically. A a
+ Das Passiv wird mit to be + 3. Form des Verbs - Das Adverb von good ist well. cond et
(Partizip Perfekt) gebildet. ”
Im I was he's he was she's she was
Mit oder ohne by? its made |itwas made were we were A
1, Allgemein . . a
Meist wird das Subjekt des Aktivsatzes in einem Passivsatz you re you were The woman who is helping him is Frau they're they were Blisc.
nicht genannt. Wollen wir aber das Subjekt besonders betonen, können wir es mit Hilfe von by am Satzende anfügen. In Satz a ist der Name des Regisseurs besonders wichtig. In Satz b ist es uninteressant, von wem die Blumen angebaut werden.
a The film was made by Steven Spielberg.
b These flowers are grown in Kenya (by ...).
They delivered oranges to the supermarket yesterday.
Too many oranges were delivered to the supermarket yesterday!
Relativsätze sind Sätze, die eines der Relativpronomen who, which oder where enthalten. Sie beschreiben das Wort, auf das sie sich beziehen, naher.
who, which oder where?
+ who für Personen
+ which für Sachen
+ where für Orte
Boris can do things very quickly.
The document which she has in her hand is Herr Krueger's boarding card.
A passenger is a person who travels by plane.
A plane is a machine which carries people.
The place where passengers check in is the check-in desk.
The guy who goes toa fitness club every day is A or B?
Anhang Grammar summary 105

--- Page 56 ---
KlettLernen Bearbeiten
Vocabulary
Allgemein: Aktiv- und Passivsätze
Oft verwenden wir zwei Verben hintereinander. 1 2
Im Englischen ist das zweite Verb manchmal ein Infinitiv I want to leam Chinese.
(to do sth) und manchmal eine ing-Form (Verb + -ing).
Welche von beiden Formen du verwenden musst, hängt 1 2 vom ersten Verb ab. Auf manche Verben folgt immer ein love watching movies.
Infinitiv, auf andere folgt immer eine ing-Form. In sehr wenigen Fällen können beide Formen verwendet werden.
Es gibt auch ein paar nützliche Ausdrücke, auf die eine ing-Form folgt.
Infinitiv oder ing-Form?
ka . afford like /enjoy / love / (not)
Dies sind die wichtigsten Verben und Ausdriicke, agree mind/prefer/dislike/ auf die ein Infinitiv oder eine ing-Form folgt. choose hate/(can‘t) stand decide expect give up forget imagine hope miss learn practise manage suggest need promise Und die Ausdriicke:
try it's no good ...
want there's no point in ...
wouldlike |that means...
Vorsicht!
Auf das Verb to like folgt eine ing-Form. Aber auf would like | like swimming.
folgt ein Infinitiv. | would like to go to the USA one day.
to begin und to start
Auf diese beiden Verben kann ein Infinitiv oder eine ing- It started to rain.
Form folgen, ohne dass sich die Bedeutung verändert. OR:
It started
106
2586826 8002008
1. Woher kommt der Text: Zeitung? Sachbuch? Roman? ... ?
2 Handelt es sich um einen Sachtext oder um einen fiktionalen Text?
3. Was erwartest du, wenn du die Bilder und den Titel ansiehst? Wird der Text sachlich, spannend, informatiy, ... sein?
4. Weißt du etwas über den Autor und die Zeit, in der der Text spielt bzw. geschrieben wurde?
Lies den Text. Ist er so, wie du erwartet hast? Was ist anders?
Wie kannst du die Bedeutung der neuen Wörter erschließen?
A crazy idea!
For centuries stories about UFOs and aliens have attracted people: Spaceships land on the Earth, people go out to take photos and never return, aliens enter the brains of people and control their bodies, hideous creatures try to take control of our world. Many people all over the world believe that there are aliens on the Earth. There are thousands of stories from people who claim that they have seen UFOs, met aliens or been on an alien planet. But astronomers and other scientists are more sceptical. They want facts not fiction. They say that the chances of meeting an alien are not very high and most of these stories come from people who have visions. Others have a lot ofimagination and believe that what they imagined really happened.
Schau dir die markierten Wörter an und lies dazu folgende Tipps:
Vergleich: Was könnte das englische Wort return bedeuten? Überlege, ob du ein ähnliches
Wort in einer anderen Sprache kennst: z.B das französische Wort retourner.
Logische Ableitung: Das Wort body ist dir bekannt. Was könnte dann brain sein, wenn es deinen Körper kontrolliert?
Kontext: Ein Wort wie hideous kannst du nur mithilfe der Wörter erraten, die es umgeben.
Ist es wohl eher ein positives Wort wie beautiful oder ein negatives wie horrible?
Wortbildung: Du kennst bereits das Nomen control.Was könnte der Ausdruck take control of bedeuten? Das Verb imagine ist dir auch bekannt, so dass imagination leicht zu verstehen ist.
Deutsch: Die fehlenden drei neuen Wörter kannst du erraten, weil sie deutschen Wörtern ähneln: z.B.: sceptical = skeptisch.
Das heißt, du müsstest nur das Wort daim im Wörterbuch nachschlagen, falls du es doch nicht aus dem Kontext heraus verstehen kannst.
1. Was ist das Hauptthema: Astronomers? The Earth? Aliens?
2. Wie ist die Argumentationskette bzw. der Handlungsverlauf: Welches sind die Argumente dafür und dagegen? / Was passiert?
3. Was ist die Schlussfolgerung?/Wie endet der Text?
‚Anhang Grammar summary 107 aan
< 106/107
2OSQSo. 15. Feb. 16:40

--- Page 57 ---
of Mie 2 Q'il? @ xX
| Grammarsummary Skills files | Vocabulary
2 Texte verfassen 3 Eine Postkarte schreiben
‚Anbei findest du acht Schritte (steps), die dir helfen können einen guten Zwischen einer Postkarte aus dem englischsprachigen Ausland und
Text zu schreiben. einer Postkarte, wie du sie schreiben würdest, gibt es einige Unterschiede - und nicht nur sprachliche.
1 Task Was genau ist deine Aufgabe? Was für einen Text sollst du schreiben? Wozu?
Worüber? 1 Greeting Hi, oder Hello, mit Namen sind üblich. Du kannst auch Dear ..., sagen.
2 Content Welche Punkte musst du erwähnen? Vergiss das Komma nach dem Namen nicht.
3 Type of text Welche Merkmale hat ein solcher Text? 2 Dateandplace Im British English schreibt man oft Datum und Ortsnamen oben rechts vom Text.
Plan Mache einen Entwurf. Vergewissere dich, dass du keine Punkte 3__ First word Das erste Wort wird groß geschrieben.
vergessen hast. 4 About you Sage, wie es dir geht und was du gerade tust. (present continuous)
5 Words and phrases | Welche key words gibt es zu dem Thema? Benutze ein Wörterbuch, falls du 5 Theweather Ein oder zwei kurze Sätze genügen.
Hilfe brauchst. Fallen dir sogar schon ganze Sätze ein? Sammle alle Wörter, 6 Areport Sage, was du an welchem Tag gemacht hast. (simple past)
Halbsätze und Sätze in einer mind map. 7 Fut la Say d hast (want to, will, Id like to, ...) und
6 First copy Schreibe einen ersten Entwurf. Lass zwischen den Zeilen Platz frei, damit du ee ou was duvor — SE (mar £0, Will Woufg Ike 10, <=) und wann.
Korrekturen einfügen kannst. 8 Short forms Es wird oft abgekürzt z.B. (CU... , Luv)
7 Partner check Bitte einen Partner/eine Partnerin, deinen Text zu lesen. Versteht 9 Closing Vergiss deinen Namen nicht. (X = ein Kuss, 0 = eine Umarmung) er/sie ihn? Baue seine/ihre Korrekturen in deinen Text mit ein. 10 Thename Anreden wie Mr, Ms oder Mrs brauchst du nicht in der Adresse.
8 Final copy Schreibe den Text neu. 11 Theaddress Schreibe die Adresse genauso auf, wie du sie von deinem Freund/ deiner
Freundin bekommen hast.
vorsicnt! Es gibt vele fake friends und Fallen im Englischen as 12 Postcode Vergiss die Postleitzahl nicht. Sie steht nach dem Ort.
eißt, dass es manche gleich aussehende Wörter im Englischen u 13 Country Wenn du aus dem Ausland schreibst, gib das Zielland an.
Deutschen gibt, die in den beiden Sprachen aber etwas anderes bedeuten. Hier sind ein paar Beispiele:
German English German English
Handy mobile (phone) praktisch handy + Duk 2)
Gymnasium | grammarschool Turnhalle gym(nasium) 1 cd)
Technik technology Methode technique x
Chips crisps Pommes frites | chips
Mappe folder Karte map se t 6) w (7) u Henry McFarlane (10) nd Str ql)
The end of a beautiful friendship?
1 (8) when
What's your handy number,
Susan?
S md (13)
Handy number? What's that? (8) Lu m 108 Anhang Skills files 109

--- Page 58 ---
@ = KlettLernen
Bearbeiten
Grammar summary 4 Skills files
Vocabulary
4 Eine Bewerbung schreiben 5 Einen Lebenslauf (CV) auf Englisch schreiben
Wenn du dich auf Englisch um eine Stelle bewirbst, solltest du neben einem Begleitbrief einen Lebenslauf (CV) und Kopien sämtlicher Zeugnisse mitschicken. Im Begleitbrief zeigst du, wie gut du schreiben und berichten kannst. Manchmal wird in der Anzeige ein handschriftlich geschriebener Brief verlangt. Ube, bevor du den Brief endgültig abschickst.
Den Musterbrief unten kannst du als Vorlage verwenden.
Auf S. 74 siehst du einen teilweise ausgefüllten, englischen Lebenslauf (CV). VORSICHT! Es ist im englischsprachigen Raum nicht üblich, ein Foto mitzuschicken. Hier sind die wichtigsten Angaben:
CV (curriculum vitae) ist ein lateinischer Begriff und heißt
110
1 Name Vorname, dann Nachname
Übersetzt ‚course of life”
2 Address mit Postleitzahl und Land (= Lebenslauf)
3 Tel. mit intemationaler Vorwahl
Suzie Tan (1) f errata 4 Email Prüfe, ob du sie richtig geschrieben hast
Mr Richard Rich Liverpool LI567TU @) 5 Dateofbirth British English = Tag/Monat/Jahr
Sunshine Film Studios American English = Monat /Tag /Jahr a
40) Belen Bad 23 July 2012 6 Place of birth Stadt + Land Referees
London SW 6 90P @) Ref: Hol2397 (5) Falls der Arbeitgeber sich
7 Primary Voller Name und Adresse + Angabe der Jahres für dich interessiert, wird er
. school zahlen von ... bis
Dear Mr Rich (4) sich mit deinen referees in ler Na A a
(6) With reference to your ad on the Internet on 20th July, I would like to apply for a job as a studio 8 es voller N hier und ae + Angabe der Verbindung setzen. Du bend aesistant at Sunshine Film Studios in London. school Jahreszahlen von ... bis ... tigst fiir deinen Arbeitgeber
I finished school on June 26. At the moment I am working as an assistant for a photographer. It is a 9 Examinations Name und Datum der Prüfungen möglicherweise 2-3 Empfeh temporary position and I am looking for a permanent job. I would really like to work in London. 10 Skills Fähigkeiten und Fertigkeiten, die für den Job lungsschreiben von referees.
Hooked at your company’s homepage and some of your projects look very interesting. I have ee ahotourah Sie sollten den Arbeitgeber some experience of the film world. I had a holiday job in a TV studio last year. My special skills are & puter, pnotograpfiy über deine Persönlichkeit und organizing and working with people. 11 Work Praktika und Jobs, die du gemacht hast: Wo? deine Leistungen im Job in
As you will ee from my CV, L was born in China but speak and write god English and German. experience Was? Wann? formieren. (Bei Bewerbungen
Thave some knowledge of Chinese, too. This could be useful with visitors who do not speak English. 12 Interests Hobbys, Sport, ehrenamtliche Tätigkeiten usw. im englischsprachigen Raum
Hook forward to hearing from you soon.
Yours sincerely (7)
13 Referees
Telefonnummer)
Lehrer, Trainer, Arbeitgeber, ... (Name, Adresse, bekommst du deine Empfehlungsbriefe nicht zu sehen)
Suzie Tan
Encl. (8)
6 Eine formelle E-Mail schreiben
1 Name In englischsprachigen Ländern schreibt man auch zuerst den Vomamen und dann _ . . a .
den Nachnamen Wie bei einem formellen Brief, schreibst du in einer formellen E-Mail eine Anrede, eine Einleitung und ein paar abschließende Worte.
2 Address Bei Adressen steht die Hausnummer vor dem Straßennamen. Abkürzungen wie
St. (Street) , Ave. (Avenue), Cl. (Close), Pde. (Parade) sind üblich.
3 Postal codes schreibe die Adresse genau so, wie sie in der Anzeige steht.
sind unterschiedlich in verschiedenen Ländem. Falls du an eine Firma schreibst,
Der Betreff (Re) sagt, worum es geht.
Wenn du den Namen der angesprochenen Person
Re.
Dear (Sir or Madam) Mr/Ms ...,
4 Dear..., Schreibe Sir or Madam, wenn du den Namen der Person nicht kennst. nicht kennst, verwende die Form in Klammem.
Bei Männernamen schreibe Mr, bei Frauennamen Ms.
Das erste Wort wird groß geschrieben. With reference to your
5 Ref: .. bedeutet reference oder Betreff.
6 The fi rd hreibt 8. Sei immer höflich, auch wenn du dich beschweren | Would it be possible to ... ?
Sts schreibt man immer groi willst. Id be very grateful if you could
7 Closing Wenn du die Anrede Sir or Madam verwendest, dann schreibst du Yours faithfully. I look forward to hearing from you.
Ansonsten Yours sincerely.Vergiss das ‚s bei Yours nicht
Verwende die richtige Schlussformel Yours faithfully /sincerely
8 Encl = endlosed verwendest du, wenn du weitere Unterlagen beilegst (= Anlagen).
Anhang Skills files
111

--- Page 59 ---
KlettLernen Bearbeiten
Grammar summary Vocabulary
>‘ Swallows Garden Centres
(2) Our ref: CM/jg
(3) 23 March 20..
(4) Otto Wolff GmbH
An der Seilbahn 35
42105 Wuppertal
Germany
(5) Dear Mr Skorikov
(6) Purchase order No. 1249
Thank you for your offer of 21 March. Please find enclosed our purchase order.
We note that your prices include a 5% quantity discount for orders over
50 items and that the prices are DDP Oxford, England. We also note that for a first order you require payment in full with our order and we have today made a bank transfer to you of €14,962.50.
tv)
The consignment will be dispatched within 10 days of receipt of our payment.
(8) Yours sincerely
© Charlotte Mitchell
(10) Charlotte Mitchell
Purchasing Manager
(11) Encl: Purchase order No. 1249
Gestaltung eines Geschäftsbriefs
Es gibt keine standardmäßige Gestaltung für einen englischen
Geschäftsbrief. Gängig ist die Gestaltung, die hier verwendet wird, bei der nach dem Briefkopf alle Zeilen linksbündig sind.
1 Letterhead (Briefkopf)
Im Briefkopf stehen Firmenname, Postadresse und andere Kontaktdaten wie Telefonnummer und Internetadresse. Oft wird hier ein Firmenlogo abgedruckt.
112
258688626 8004
998
2 Reference(s) (Zeichen)
Die Zeichen beinhalten die Initialen der Person, die den Brief verfasst hat (hier Charlotte Mitchell), und der Person, die den Brief getippt hat (hier Jenny Goff). Im Antwortschreiben gibt man diese
Zeichen an und schreibt: "Your ref.’
3 Date (Datum)
Um Missverständnisse zu vermeiden, sollte das Datum immer ausgeschrieben werden - 09.10. ist in den USA der 10. September, in
Europa dagegen der 9. Oktober.
4 Inside address (Empfängeranschrift)
Das ist die Empfängeranschrift. Wenn man an eine Adresse im
Vereinigten Königreich schreibt, sollte man das Postleitzahl in eine extra Zeile unter den Namen der Stadt schreiben. Außerdem sollte man nicht vergessen, dass in britischen und amerikanischen
Adressen die Hausnummer vor dem Straßennamen steht.
(75 Banbury Road).
5/8 Salutation /Complimentary dose (Anrede/ Schlussformel)
Anrede und Schlussformel sind miteinander verbunden: Welche
Schlussformel (8) in einem Brief verwendet wird, hängt davon ab, welche Anrede (5) zu Beginn des Briefes verwendet wurde.
Wenn man eine Firma zum ersten Mal anschreibt und den Namen des Ansprechpartners nicht kennt, beginnt man mit Dear Sirs oder
Dear Sir or Madam und beendet den Brief mit Yours faithfully. Später, wenn man den Namen weiß, schreibt man Dear (Mr .../Mrs.../
Ms...) und beendet den Brief weniger formell mit Yours sincerely.
Wenn man einen Geschäftspartner wirklich gut kennt, kann man auch mit Dear (Vorname) beginnen und mit einer freundlichen
Schlussformel enden, wie Kind regards oder Best wishes.
6 Subject line (Betreffzeile)
Die Betreffzeile wird in fetten Buchstaben geschrieben oder unterstrichen. Sie steht nach der Anrede.
7 Body of the letter (Hauptteil des Briefes)
Das erste Wort des Hauptteils des Briefes fängt immer mit einen
GROßBUCHSTABEN an. Absätze werden durch Leerzeilen getrennt.
9/10 Signature (Unterschrift)
Die Person, die den Brief verfasst, unterschreibt den Brief handschriftlich. Da Unterschriften aber oft schwer zu lesen sind, wird der Name der unterschreibenden Person nochmals unter der
Unterschrift abgedruckt, oft zusammen mit der Funktion dieser
Person in der Firma.
1 Endosure(s) (Anlagen)
‘Enclosures’ sind Dokumente oder andere Dinge, die dem Brief beigelegt werden (hier ein Bestellformular).
aan
€ maıa
2OSQoqa
Anhang Skills files 113
So. 15. Feb. 16:40 oy

--- Page 60 ---
cf ae © Ql? @ x
| Grammarsummary Skills files | Vocabulary
8 Hörtexte verstehen 9 Sich auf ein Vorstellungsgespräch vorbereiten
Vor dem Hören: Es ist sehr wichtig, sich auf das Gespräch gut vorzubereiten. Dann kannst du dich
Es hilft dir, folgende Punkte zu klären, bevor du versuchst, einen Hörtext während des Vorstellungsgesprächs besser auf das Wesentliche konzentrieren.
zu verstehen:
. > . . > Before the interview 1. Informiere dich über die Stelle /das Land/die Firma/ ...
1. Kontext: Wo kommt der Text her? Was weißt du schon über solche Texte? 2. Uberlege dir 2-3 Fragen, die du stellen kannst.
3. Mach dir Gedanken, was du zu dem Vorstellungsgesprach anziehst:
Medien Öffentliche Ansagen Persönliche Gespräche im Alltag einen Anzug/Rock/eine Jeans? Deine Kleidung muss auf jeden Fall sauber und gepflegt sein. Trage nicht zu viel Schmuck / Make-up.
Radio TV ae Bahnhof | Flughafen |... live Telefon ea .
mr: 5 = . 4. Bereite dich darauf vor, Fragen des Interviewers zu beantworten.
Hörspiel, Interview, Film Z.B. Ansage ‚Anruf, Gespräch, ... . . . . . ri "
. During the interview 1. Versuche dich zu entspannen. Schau den Interviewer an und lächle! Gib
Oft handelt es sich um einen Die gesuchte Info kann mit Du kannst immer nachfragen, wenn ihm/ihr die Hand, wenn er/sie es möchte. Deine ersten Worte sind
Bericht oder ein Interview. einem Schlüsselwort du etwas nicht verstanden hast. wichtig.
herausgehört werden. 2. Achte darauf, wie der Interviewer mit dir redet: Formell? Freundlich?
Der Rest ist unwichtig. 3. Mach dir keine Sorgen, wenn du nicht alles verstehst. Der Interviewer weiß, dass dein Englisch nicht perfekt ist.
2. Vorwissen: Was kann dir sonst noch beim Erschließen helfen? Sei ehrlich!
Der Titel Ein Bild Die Einführung Sonstige Kenntnisse
... kann bei einem Film |... hilft oft dabei, sich ... gibt Hintergrund- Wie ist die Person, mit You can ask on the phone What do I need to bring with me?
oder einer Sendung ein Bild vom Sprecher informationen bzw. der du redest? (Do you pay travel costs?) hilfreich sein. bzw. von einer erklärt die Situation. Wie könnte sie The interviewer could say Formal: Informal:
anderen Person/ reagieren? Good morning /afternoon/...,
(Roe 2) TALE Mr/ Ms ... Hi/ Hello, Pete/Sue/... !
Nice to meet you. Take a seat!
3. Was möchtest du von dem Text erfahren? (Wer? Wann? Was? Wie? Wo? Warum?) haat take a seat/sit down,
Allgemeines Bestimmte Details Eine Information The interviewer could ask Why are you interested in this job?
Was ist das Hauptthema? Um Wer redet? Welche Detaillierte Angaben zu einer Have you worked abroad before?
welches Problem /welchen Inhalt Angaben werden zu einem bestimmten Frage, z.B.,Wann What are your best subjects?
geht es? Problem /Thema gemacht? fährt der nächste Zug?” What would you do if you had a difficult customer?/ ...
Do you have any questions?
If you don’t understand Could you repeat the question, please?
m u something, you can ask Excuse me. Could you say that again, please?
Kanrend des hörensı Excuse me. What does (the word) ... mean?
“ 7 ‚. Coul ly, ?
1. Falls du dir mehrere Punkte notieren willst, kannst du eine Liste, {im sorry. Could you speak more slowly, please eine mind map oder eine Tabelle anfertigen. You can ask at the interview How big is your company?
2. Hör dir den Text bei einer Prüfung zwei- oder dreimal an. Im Alltag How many people work here?
ist das nicht méglich, aber dann kannst du immer jemanden fragen.
3. Priife, ob du alle Infos hast, die du brauchst.
Nach dem Hören:
Erledige sämtliche Aufgaben mithilfe deiner Notizen. Falls du mit einem
Partner/einer Partnerin zusammenarbeitest, vergleicht eure Ergebnisse.
je} 114 Anhang Skillsfiles 115 nun
114/115

--- Page 61 ---
Grammar summary {Skills files | Vocabulary
10 Ein Interview mit jemandem führen 2 Wählt eine Präsentationsform, die ihr interessant findet und bei der ihr eure Talente am besten anwenden könnt. Hier ein paar
Bevor du ein Interview führst, ist es wichtig, dass du versuchst im Voraus Beispiele:
etwas über die Person bzw. das Thema zu erfahren. So kannst du leichter
Fragen stellen. Das Interview wird dadurch interessanter. A display Ademonstration (talents Asales talk
(talents: drawing, designing) making/ explaining things) (talents: public speaking)
Tipps Im Studio Auf der Straße z
1. Be polite.
Good morning /afternoon... Excuse me. I'm from ... ®
My name is/I'm ... School. May | ask you
Thank you for coming to a question about / your the studio/... opinion on ...?
A discussion Aperformance A computer presentation a (talents: speaking, working ina _ (talents: singing, performing, (talents: using equipment, group) acting) typing)
2. Prepare your questions. (
Beginne mit Who do you ...?/What have you ...?/ What is your opinion on ...?
einem Fragewort. Why did you ...?
Beginne mit Can you tell me ...?/ Do you think people should ...?
einem Verb. Have you ever ...?/ls it true that ...? Can you remember ...?
Beginne mit einer Please, tell us about .../explain... Could you say something about ...?
höflichen Einladung/ Would you be prepared to give us your
Aufforderung, opinionon ...?
Weitere Präsentationsformen, die ihr in diesem Buch findet, sind:
a web page, an advert, an interview, a talk show, a PowerPoint
3.Say goodbye.
Bedanke dich und sage Thank you very much ... That was Thank you Sir/Madam/ presentation, a reading, a quiz, a summary, a report, a talk, noch etwas Nettes. very interesting / ... We hope you You have been very helpful. a gallery walk.
enjoy your stayin... Have a nice day.
3. Tipps für eine PowerPoint-Präsentation:
11 Eine Prasentation vorbereiten +
1. Schreibt zunächst ein Handout und macht Kopien für die Klasse. ipps
Hier ein Beispiel: 1. Plan your presentation on paper first.
2. Write down a title.
3. Write down the aspects of the topic as a list.
The title Deadly creatures Schreibt den Titel als Überschrift auf die Seite. 4. Write a few key words on each aspect.
5. Start your PowerPoint programme.
6. Type the title on to one ‘page’ and your key words on
Part A Important words Wählt 10-12 wichtige Wörter bzw. Wendungen to the other ‘pages’ Use your key words in sentences
Important shark = Hai aus und erstellt eine Wortliste. during your presentation.
words gine 7. Use pictures and diagrams to improve your
Part B Facts Schreibt 5-6 wichtige Fakten auf. Presentation
Facts The Great White Shark is ...
Part C Lots of dangerous ... in ... Lasst Platz für Notizen.
Notes je} 116 Anhang Skills files 117

--- Page 62 ---
@ KlettLernen
Bearbeiten So. 15. Feb. 16:40 ofp ® Qi? @ x
| Sammer summary | Vocabutary
4. Überprüft, ob eure Mitschüler / innen alles verstanden haben, was ihr ihnen gezeigt bzw. erzählt habt.
Du liest und hörst in der Klasse oft: Compare your answers with a
‚partner, then report to the class. Dies wird Think-Pair-Share genannt.
Awrittentest Das können z.B. Fragen, ein Lückentext, ein beschriftetes Diagramm, ein Quiz, nn
So funktioniert es:
ein Kreuzworträtsel, ein Fehlertext bzw. ein Fehlerbild sein.
An oral test
Spiele aller Art: Rollenspiele, Ratespiele, Nacherzählungen, Interviews,
Zusammenfassungen, ...
‚z.B.
Ein Kartenspiel: Schreibe Fragen auf Kärtchen. Die anderen ziehen eine Karte und beantworten die Frage.
Es gibt viele verschiedene Arten einer Diskussion / Debatte.
Folgende Tipps und Redewendungen können euch helfen: a,
Tipps
Einigt euch auf eine Aussage
(statement/motion).
Schreibt sie an die Tafel.
Wer macht den Vorsitz?
Er/Sie muss die Diskussion/
Debatte mithilfe der Sätze rechts leiten.
Die Sprecher sammeln Argumente
Ausdrücke
I think ... is a good statement.
I'd like to suggest ... as our statement.
Let's vote on it. Who's for/against the statement ...
Statement: Everybody should work for a short time in another country.
Good morning /afternoon.
Our statement for today’s discussion is: ...
Speakers for/against the statement are ...
The first speaker for /against the statement is ...
... , it's your turn. You may speak now.
Thank you ... . Your time is up.
lagree/don't agree with the statement.
für und gegen die Aussage. In my opinion ...
I think it is wrong /important to say that ...
Der/ Die Vorsitzende fragt, ob Yes, ..., what would you like to say?
andere ihre Meinung äußern möchten.
Der/ Die Vorsitzende beendet die
Diskussion / Debatte und fordert zur Abstimmung auf.
Please raise your hand if you are for/ against the statement.
The results of the vote are ... for and ... against the statement.
+ Mach dir Gedanken zu der Aufgabe und notiere sie. Dein Lehrer kann dir eine zeitliche Grenze von z.B. 5 Minuten geben.
+ Finde eine/n Partner/in. Lest euch eure Notizen gegenseitig vor.
Zeig sie deinem/r Partner/in nicht! Dies ist eine Sprechaktivität.
+ Korrigiert eure Notizen, wenn ihr einen Fehler findet oder fügt neue
Informationen hinzu, wenn eine/r von euch eine bessere Idee hat.
- Du oder dein/e Partner/in präsentiert eure gemeinsamen Ideen der
Klasse, oder wenn die Aufgabe lang genug ist, stellt ihr sie beide abwechselnd vor.
Cheat sheet heißt auf Deutsch Spickzettel und ist eine gute Möglichkeit, einen Text zusammenzufassen und eine kurze Präsentation darüber zu halten. So funktioniert es:
* Geh den Text durch und notiere Schlüsselbegriffe und wichtige
Ausdrücke auf ein kleines Stück Papier. Diese Schlüsselbegriffe enthalten die wichtigsten Informationen des Textes.
+ Gehe deine Notizen durch und streiche alle Wörter durch, die nicht absolut notwendig sind! Idealerweise solltest du nur einen
Schlüsselbegriff für jeden Teil des Textes haben.
* Verwende deine Liste (cheat sheet), um deine Präsentation zu halten.
Die Schlüsselbegriffe helfen dir, dir zu merken, was du sagen willst, aber du solltest soweit wie möglich deine eigenen Worte benutzen.
Wiederhole nicht einfach den Originaltext!
Am Ende vieler Gruppenarbeiten in der Klasse werdet ihr einen Text, z.B. eine E-Mail oder vielleicht ein Poster produziert haben. Ein gallery walk ist eine Möglichkeit, eure Arbeitsergebnisse in der Klasse zu zeigen. So funktioniert es:
+ Hängt die Ergebnisse aller Gruppen im Klassenraum auf und verteilt sie soweit voneinander entfernt wie möglich.
+ Dann schaut ihr euch jede Gruppenarbeit im Klassenzimmer an.
+ Wenn du bei deiner Arbeit angekommen bist, halte dort an und sei bereit, sie zu erklären und Fragen der Klasse hierzu zu beantworten.
Jede/r in deiner Gruppe sollte hierzu in der Lage sein.
+ Fahrt in dieser Weise fort, bis jede/r alle Arbeiten gesehen hat.
- Zum Schluss diskutiert ihr die Ergebnisse in der Klasse. Welches war das beliebteste/ interessanteste /am besten präsentierte? Warum?
Anhang Skills files
119

--- Page 63 ---
@ KlettLernen
Bearbeiten
120
Grammar summary Skills files
& videotraining: Englische Aussprache
Perfekte englische Aussprache leicht gemacht: Mit dem Lemprogramm zur englischen Lautschrift können Sie alle Laute einüben. Wählen Sie einfach in der Navigation rechts den entsprechenden Reiter (Vowels oder Consonants) aus und klicken Sie dann auf das gewünschte phonetische Symbol.
Sprechen Sie die Wörter laut nach.
Unter www.klett.de geben Sie bitte den Code unter der Abbildung rechts ein.
Abkürzungen und Zeichen etw etwa = links pl = Plural, Mehrzahl = rechts sb = somebody sth =something = entspricht
BE _ =britisches Englisch ++ istdas Gegenteil von
AE = amerikanisches Englisch = verwandt mit
AustrE = australisches Englisch Achtung
NewZE = neuseeländisches Englisch to get ready (got, got) |,get vedi] sich bereitmachen opposite ['opazıt] gegenüber notes [nauts] Notizen background ["beekgraund] Hintergrund all day [,9:1 ‘det] den ganzen Tag lang at lunchtime [ot ‘lantjtarm] mittags
That depends. [dat di'pendz] Das kommt darauf an.
kind [kaund] Art, Sorte beginning [brainy] Anfang hairdressing ['headresın] Friseur-, Friseurhandwerk trainee {tres ‘Auszubildende/r woodworking [‘wodwa:kin] to train to be sb [,trem 9 'i]
Holzbe-/-verarbeitung Holzeine Ausbildung zum/zur ...
machen arpenter [ku:panta] Zimmermann, Schreiner wood [wud] Holz sense [sens] Sinn humour ['hju:mo] Humor maths [mze0s] Mathe(matik) fantastic [Genttzesuk] großartig, fantastisch
PHONETIC ALPHABET
Vor den Vokabeln findest du immer die jeweiligen
Übungsnummern der Unit.
blue Vokabel aus Hörtext
I must get ready for the party tonight.
That girl that lives in the house opposite mine.
The man in the background has a red shirt.
At lunchtime we always go out for a sandwich.
It tastes sweet - it's a kind of fruit.
hairdressing — hairdresser trainee — trainer — to train
He wants to train to bea pilot.
She's always laughing. She has a great sense of humour.
to expect [ik'spekt] to expect sb to do sth [ıkspekt]
‘on one’s own [on wanz ‘aun] self-discipline |self’dısoplin] adult [wdalt] industry [indastri] result [rizalt] chart [tja:t] nursery [ns:sori] nursery worker ['n:sori wa:ko] to feed [fi:d] to change a baby [1 Jeındz a beıbi] to make sure [,meik ‘{uo] safe |seıf] safety [sei] responsible [n'sponsobl] ring [kearin| administrative assistant
[ad mınıstrativ o'ststant] day-to-day [der to der] smoothly ['smu:dli] telephone ['telıfoun]
‘to type [tarp] to photocopy [Tautaukppi] to print [print] accurate [wwkjorat] to communicate [ko'mju:nikett] bracket ["brekit} dever ['klevo] creative [krieitiv] prize [pratz] hometown [haum'taun] dass trip [Klass trip] chips [1 ips] sick [stk] nurse [13:5]
‘one day [,wan det] to paint [peint] to decorate [‘dekoreit] flat [feet]
No smoking. [,nou 'smoukın] link [link] based on [’beist on] conference [’konforans} to introduce sb |ıntro'diu:s] talk [tok] to give atalk [giv o to:k] daily routine [,deli ru:'tizn] careers advice centre
[karıoz advass senta] dream [drizm] erwarten von jdm erwarten, etw zu tun allein
Selbstdisziplin
Erwachsene/r
Branche, Industrie
Ergebnis
Tabelle, Diagramm
Kindertagesstätte
Kindergärtner/in, Erzieher/in füttern einem Baby die Windeln wechseln sicherstellen, gewährleisten sicher
Sicherheit verantwortungsbewusst fürsorglich
Verwaltungsassistent/in tagesaktuell, alltäglich reibungslos, glatt
Telefon tippen fotokopieren drucken, ausdrucken genau kommunizieren
Klammer intelligent, gescheit kreativ, schöpferisch
Preis, Auszeichnung
Heimatstadt
Klassenfahrt
(BE) Pommes frites krank
Krankenschwester, Krankenpfleger irgendwann) einmal malen tapezieren
(BE) Wohnung
Rauchen verboten.
Verbindung, Kontakt anhand von, basierend auf
Konferenz jdn vorstellen
Vortrag einen Vortrag halten
(routinemäßiger) Tagesablauf
Berufsberatung(szentrum)
Traum oqa
They expect me to be there at 9 o'clock every day.
Sue never gets angry. She has a lot of self discipline.
Betonung industry — industrial
You feed animals and babies.
Can you make sure the light is out, please.
These days cars have many safety features.
Nursing isa caring profession.
It's important that it goes smoothly and the guests are happy.
Where did you learn to type so fast?
accurate ++ inaccurate to communicate - communication
Nicht das Deutsche clever creative — creation — to create
Crisps = Kartoffelchips
He was so sick he couldn't go to school.
One day he wants to climb Mount Everest.
to decorate - decoration
The film is based on a true story.
I'd like to introduce you to my parents.
a dream about sth
Anhang Vocabulary 121
So. 15. Feb. 16:40 a x

--- Page 64 ---
@ KlettLernen
Bearbeiten
122
Grammar summary tram [trem] hardly ever [,hazdli eva] business trip [‘brznas trip] to check in [1 jek in] check-in ['t/ekrn] check-in desk [‘/ekin desk] clerk [kla:k] boarding card ['ba:din ka:d] machine [mafizn] passenger [pxesind3a] departure [di paztja] departures [dı'pa:tjaz] gate [get] to depart [dipa:t} security check [srkjvarsti tfek] security officer [s’kjuorati pfiso] baggage [beegids] through [Oru:] passport [‘pa:spo:t] passport check ['pa:spozt tek] passport officer ["pazspa:t pfiso} to board |bo:d] baggage reclaim
[beegids 'rizklem] customs [kastamz] customs check ['kastamz tfek] customs officer ['kastamz pfisa] seat [sit] heading ['hedın] arrival [2'rarvl] definition |,def'nijn] pilot ['patlot] exciting [1kSaitiy] roller coaster ['raulo kausta] theme park ['Gi:m pack] fair [feo] electrical technician
[siektrikl tek'nifn] equipment |’kwıpmant] to service |'ss:vis]
‘on foot [on Tut] ideal [ardi:ol] playground [pleigraund] children’s playground
[tfildranz 'pleigraund]
Wi-Fi ['wat far] connection [konekfn] to note sth [naut] non-smoking |‚nonsmaukın] total [tautl] key [ki:] registration |,redsr'streijn] registration form
[redsıstreifn fo:m] to fill in [,fil in]
Skills files
Straßenbahn, Tram kaum (jemals)
Geschäftsreise einchecken
Abfertigung
‚Abfertigungsschalter
Angestellte/r
Bordkarte
Gerät, Maschine
Passagier
Abflug, Abfahrt
Abflughalle, Terminal
Flugsteig, Gate abfliegen, abfahren
Sicherheitskontrolle
Sicherheitsbeamte/r, -beauftragte/r
Gepäck durch (... hindurch)
Pass, Reisepass
Passkontrolle
Passbeamte/r an Bord gehen
Gepackausgabe
Zoll
Zollkontrolle
Zollbeamter
Sitz
Überschrift
Ankunft
Definition
Pilot/in aufregend, spannend
Achterbahn
Vergnügungs-, Themenpark
Jahrmarkt
Elektriker/in
Geräte, Ausrüstung, Ausstattung warten, instandhalten zu Fuß ideal
Spielplatz
Kinderspielplatz drahtlos, wireless
Verbindung
(etw) beachten
NichtraucherGesamtanzahl
Schlüssel
Anmeldung
Formular ausfüllen
| hardly ever see you any more.
When she arrived, she checked in at the hotel.
To board is to get ona plane ora ship.
‚Abkürzung ~ dep.
to depart + to arrive
Baggage ist Singular: The baggageis ...
‚Aussprache: -ough wie -o indo
You need a passport to leave the country.
The customs allow you to bring in one bottle of wine.
| wanta seat by the window.
an exciting film; an excited child
Theme parks are popular with children.
The equipment they have is very old.
on foot; by bus, by train, by boat, by plane connection — to connect
Ifyou add 3 and 6, it comes to a total of 9.
registration — to register
Fill this in, sign it and give it to me.
to enjoy sth |in'dzor] stay [steı] in full [in fol] finally [ainoli] to include [1n’klu:d] alcoholic [e1kaholik] postcard |'poustka:d]
Best wishes, [,best ‘wiliz] role-play ['roul pleı] to role-play [raul plet] part [pa:t] apprentice [oprentıs] chemicals [kemıklz] chemicals company
[’kemikiz kamponi] laboratory [Is'boratri] trainer [treina] paint [peınt]
PAC [‚piz el siz] acouple of [2 ‘kapl av] quite [kwait] satisfactorily | sets feektoroli] badly ['beedli] to grow (grew, grown) [grou] manufacturer |, mzenju'fiektforo] head office [,hed 'ofis]
Russia |'rafo] process [prouses] automatically [,9:to'mzetikli] robot [raubot] home [haum] building [bıldın] tractor [trekto] bridge [brid]
DIY Do-it-yourself) [di: a1 wat]
DIY shop ‚di: ar ‘war jop] exactly [ig zekili] to be happy [bi 'hepi] automatic |‚tamaetık] exact [1gzekt]
Nice to meet you. [‚naıs to 'mi:t ju]
Pleased to meet you.
[plizzd ta ‘mist ju] to look round [,luk raund] this way [d1s weı] to act [:ekt] tour [to] raw materials |,ro: moftiariolz] production [pra‘dak{n] quality [‘kwoloti] quality control [’kwolati kantroul] etw genieBen
Aufenthalt vollständig schließlich, endlich einbeziehen, einschließen alkoholisch
Postkarte
(Brief:) Alles Gute
Rollenspiel in einem Rollenspiel darstellen
Rolle
‚Auszubildende/r, Lehrling
Chemikalien
Chemiebetrieb
Labor
Ausbilder/in
Farbe
AG, Aktiengesellschaft ein paar ziemlich, recht zufriedenstellend schlecht wachsen
Hersteller, Fabrikant
Zentrale
Russland
Prozess, Vorgang, Verfahren automatisch
Roboter
Haus, Wohnung, Zuhause
Gebäude
Traktor
Brücke
Heimwerken
Baumarkt genau sich freuen automatisch genau
Schön, Sie kennenzulernen.
Schön, Sie kennenzulernen.
Sehr angenehm.
sich umsehen hier entlang spielen, schauspielern
Rundgang, Tour
Rohstoffe
Produktion
Qualität
Qualitätskontrolle oqa stay — to stay
Tired and hungry, we finally arrived.
alcoholic— alcohol apprentice — apprenticeship
Betonung paint — to paint
= Public Limited Co.
Wait a moment. There are a couple of things
Ineed to do.
It is quite hot today, nearly 25°.
badly + well
Bamboo is a plant which grows very fast.
manufacturer ++ to manufacture
Russia — Russian
The light goes on automatically when you enter the room.
He works in London, but his home is in
Manchester.
Farmers drive tractors.
The bridge goes over the river.
It is now exactly 9:14.
to be happy + to be sad
Nobody knows the exact numbers.
Would you like to look round the house?
to act — actor — actress
There's a tour of the town every day.
production — to produce — product
Anhang Vocabulary 123
So. 15. Feb. 16:40 a x

--- Page 65 ---
@ KlettLernen
Bearbeiten
Klett
124
3B cry ac
4E
5A
5B
5A
1B
2B
Grammar summary warehouse ['weohaus] entrance [entrans] dispatch [drspetj] powder |'pauda] oil [511] to store [sto:] tank [tenk] up there [Ap 'deo] to mix [miks] at the moment [at do maumant] can [ken] to load [loud]
‘onto [‘pnto] research and development
[nsa:tf an dıvelopmant ] administrative [od'minustrouy] to open ['supan] report |rıpa:t] because of [bikoz av] match [mzet/] expression [1kSpre{in] electronic [,1lek'tronik] to dispatch [drspeet |]
(the) following |‘filovrn)
Japan [dsopeen] location [lou'keiln] schedule ['fedju:!] facility [foSıloti] test facility [test fastloti] test manager [est menid59] managing director
[maenidsin da'rekta] factory manager
[faektori mzenidsa]
Unit 4 Global business global [‘gloubl] delivery [drlıvori] bakery ['betkari] cheese [1/i:z] pepperoni [peps'rauni]
‘sausage ['sosid3] chocolate ['i/oklot } marmalade ['ma:moleid]
Asia [‘et/o]
Italy [nali] label ['leibl] mouse, mice [maus, mats] keyboard [‘ki:bo:d] to manufacture [,mzenjufwekt{a]
‘tower [tauo] hard drive [ha:d ‘draty] motherboard ['madabo:<]
CPU [siz pit jur] central ['sentral] to process |'prouses] je
| skits files —T Vocabulary
Lager
Eingang
Versand
Pulver lagern, speichern
Tank da oben mischen im Augenblick
Dose laden, verladen auf
Forschungs- und
Entwicklungsabteilung
Verwaltungssich öffnen
Bericht aufgrund von, wegen
Spiel, Partie
‚Ausdruck elektronisch versenden der /die/das folgende
Japan
Ort, Standort
(ermin-)Plan
Anlage, Einrichtung
Versuchseinrichtung, Testanlage
Versuchsleiter/in
Geschäftsführer/in
Betriebsleiter/in, Werksleiter/in weltumspannend, global
Lieferung
Bäckerei
Käse
Peperoni
Wurst
Schokolade
Marmelade
Asien
Italien
Etikett
Maus, Mäuse
Tastatur herstellen
Turm
Festplatte
Hauptplatine
CPU zentral verarbeiten entrance + exit
You wash clothes with washing powder.
Ifyou store something, you keep it and use it later.
up there + down there
Mix the egg and the milk.
= now to load ++ to unload
‚Abkürzung: R&D administrative + to administer — administration
These doors open automatically.
We didn’t leave on time because of the snow.
Good luck! is an expression you often hear.
= to send
Japan — Japanese
They bought a house in a good location.
I'm very busy. Ihave a full schedule.
delivery — to deliver bakery — to bake
! chocolates = Pralinen
Marmaladeis always made with bitter oranges.
Asia — Asian
Italy — Italian
The label says it's made in Italy.
Central heating keeps the whole house warm.
2c
3A
3c
4B ac
4D
4E
4F
4G
4H unit [juznit] to assemble [s'sembl]
Ireland ['aralond] assembly [osembli] ech Republic [1 jek rıjpablık]
Singapore [,sins'p>:] globalisation |‚gloubalarzeıjn]
Kenya |'kenjo] farm [fa:m] to grow (grew, grown) [grau] farmer |fa:ma] grower ['grau>] tourism [tuarızam] to be on sale |bi,on seıl] market ['mazkit] to import [im'po:t]
Silicon Valley | silikan 'veeli]
India ['india] on the telephone [on da ‘telif2un] helpline ['helplaun] salary |'selori] euro [jworsu] poor [pus] mine [main] cheaply (t/i:pli]
‘on the one hand
[pn do ‘wan hend] on the other hand
[pn di Ada heend] vase [va:z] bysea [bar 'si:] tonne [tin] atastrophe [katzestrofi] to burn down (burnt, burnt)
[barn 'daun] best-selling |‚best 'seluy] fresh [fre] manufacturing process
[menju'feektfann prouses] urgent ['s:dzont] by air [bai eo] amazing [omeızın] jewellery [‘dsuzol i] logistics [Ia'dsistiks] partidple ||paztısıpl] model plane ['modl plein]
Spain [spein] architect [a:kitekt] statue [Stet{u:] liberty [bau] to give (gave, given) [giv] independent [,1ndi’pendant] war [w>:] globalised |'gloubolaizd] thousand [‘Gauznd] consequence [’konsikwans} os
124/125
Einheit montieren, zusammenbauen
Irland
Montage
Tschechische Republik
Singapur
Globalisierung
Kenia
Farm, Bauernhof
(Pflanze:) anbauen
Farmer/in, Bauer/Bäuerin
Bauer/Bäuerin, Pflanzer/in
Tourismus erhältlich sein, zum Verkauf stehen
Markt importieren
Computerzentrum in Kalifornien
Indien am Telefon
Hotline
Gehalt
Euro arm
Bergwerk billig einerseits andererseits
Vase auf dem Seeweg
Tonne
Katastrophe verbrennen, abbrennen meistverkaufte/r/s frisch
Fertigungsverfahren,
Herstellungsprozess dringend, eilig auf dem Luftweg erstaunlich
Schmuck
Logistik
Partizip
Modeliflugzeug
Spanien
Architekt/in
Statue
Freiheit schenken unabhängig
Krieg globalisiert tausend, Tausend
Folge, Auswirkung
OH Q
They sell 10,000 units a year.
Ireland — Irish farm — to farm
You can’t grow oranges in Scotland.
Tourism is a big business in Spain.
The new model has been on sale since Monday to import ++ to export on the computer - on the internet - on the radio on the television poor ++ rich
You can buy things cheaply at markets.
a vase of flowers
I travelled by sea and by land.
1 Betonung
This is the best-selling brand.
fresh bread ++ stale bread
The message is urgent!
an amazing story - an amazed look on his face jewellery — jewel — jeweller's (shop)
1 Aussprache independent — independence war + peace
! Betonung
Anhang Vocabulary
|! 2)
So. 15. Feb. 16:40
125

--- Page 66 ---
@ KlettLernen
Bearbeiten
126
Grammar summary conditions [kandjnz] environment [invarranmanı] locally ['loukali] survey ['ss:vet] graph [gra:f] overseas [auvaisizz] toothpaste [tu:Opeıst] complicated ['komplikeitid]
Fairtrade [‘featreid | pump [pamp] to take sb to dinner [terk to ‘dina]
Italian [rtzeljon] island [aıland] opportunity [‚opo'jurnati] practise ['priektis]
Kiwi ['kis wir] to cross [kros] paragraph ["peerogra:f]
New Zealander [,nju: Zi:londo] nickname [‘nikneim] to discover [drskava] explorer [1k’splo:ra] aptain [keptin] which is why [, wit) 12 wat]
Maori [mauri] per cent [po'sent] screen [skrizn] on screen [pn ‘skrizn] lake [leık] to film [film]
Lord Of The Rings
[Jo:d av 80 'rinz] sports [spats] skiing [Skiz1n] surfing ['ss:fi] dramatic [dro'mzetik]
Auckland ['s:kland] however [haufevo]
Wellington ['welnytan] accent |iekseı jandals [3 barbie [ba:bi] barbeae [ba:bıkju:] inhabitant [in'hebitant] pancake ['penke1k] delicious [dr'{as]
Here you are. [‚hıo ju‘a:]
Ymafraid ... [aim ofreid] absolutely [ebsolu:tli] to be full up [bi ful ‘ap] at night [ot ‘nait]
| Skills files
Bedingungen, Umstände
Umwelt vor Ort
Umfrage
Diagramm in Übersee
Zahncreme kompliziert
Organisation für gerechten Handel
Pumpe jdn zum Essen einladen italienisch
Insel
Gelegenheit, Chance üben, trainieren
Neuseeländer/in; Kiwi (Vogelart;
Frucht) überqueren, kreuzen
‚Absatz
Neuseeländer/in
Spitzname entdecken
Entdecker/in
Kapitän weshalb
Maori
Prozent
(Kino-)Leinwand auf der Leinwand, im Kino
See
(Film) drehen
Herr der Ringe (Buch- u. Filmtitel)
Sport
Skifahren
Surfen dramatisch, spektakulär
Stadt in Neuseeland allerdings, jedoch
Hauptstadt Neuseelands
Akzent
(NewZE:) Flip-Flops
(NewZE:) Grillparty
Grillparty
Einwohner/in, Bewohner/in
Pfannkuchen köstlich
(Hier) bitte sehr.
leider absolut, ganz und gar sattsein abends, nachts
Conditions on the road are bad becauseofthe snow.
locally + globally
They are doing a survey of teenagers.
She lived overseas for many years.
Betonung
I'd like to take you to dinner tonight.
Die erste Silbe wird wie eye ausgesprochen.
If | go to London, Il have the opportunity to speak English.
Let's cross the road.
Columbus discovered America.
She is captain of the sports team.
He is ill. Which is why he can'tcome.
She is different on screen to in real life.
lake, mountain, river
The end of the film was very dramatic.
I didn’t want to see the film. However, | enjoyed it.
The kids laughed at Susan's Scottish accent.
(BE) flip-flops
How many inhabitants does Cologne have?
Mmm! This cake is delicious.
Y'matraid | can't come tonight.
You're absolutely right!
I'm full up. | can’t eat any more.
at night ++ during the day blanket [blepkıt]
How are you? [‚hau 9 ju:] togs [togz] pardon ['pazdn] swimsuit [swimsju:t] soup [su:p] dessert [dıza:t] to borrow [borau] flightless ['flaitlos] roast [roust] beef [bi:{] pudding ['pudin] mediation [mi:di'eijn] interpreter [1n'ta:prita) salad ['selod] pillow ['plou] airhead [eohed] loads (of) [loudz]
‘explanation [,eksplo'net{n] grade [greid] average [‘vorids] satisfactory | setts fektari] suffident [sofıfnt] poor [pua] unsatisfactory |‚an,setisfektori] to fail [feıl] to divide [divand] currency [karonsi] geography [dsi'pgrafi] entertainment [ents'temmant] journey ['d53:ni] apprenticeship [o\prenti/ip] exam [ig'zem] to take an exam [,te1k an ıgzem]
GCSE (General Certificate of
‘Secondary Education)
[ sit] basic [beısık] advice [odvaıs] to give sb advice [giv advaıs] in detail [in ‘dister] straight away [streit dwet] training [treinun] government [gavanmant] alongside [2 pn/said] experienced [1k’spiorionst] tradespeople |treidzpispl] wage [weids] to study [Stadi] minimum ['mınımom] holiday [holder]
Decke
Wie geht es dir/ Ihnen?
(NewZE) Badeanzug
Entschuldigung, Verzeihung
Badeanzug
Suppe
Nachtisch leihen, ausleihen, borgen flugunfahig gebraten
Rind(fleisch)
Nachtisch
Vermittlung
Dolmetscher/in
Salat
Kopfkissen
Schwachkopf massenhaft, jede Menge
Erläuterung Erklärung
Note durchschnittlich zufriedenstellend, befriedigend ausreichend, hinreichend schlecht unbefriedigend durchfallen, (Prüfung) nicht bestehen teilen
Währung
Geographie
Unterhaltung
Fahrt
Lehre, Lehrstelle
Prüfung, Examen eine Prüfung ablegen
Schulabschlussprüfung für
%-Jährige in England, Wales und
Nordirland grundlegend, GrundRatschlag, Rat jdn beraten, jdn etw raten ausführlich, detailliert sogleich, unverzüglich
Ausbildung
Regierung neben erfahren
Handwerker, Geschäftsleute
Lohn lernen, studieren
MindestFeiertag oqa
It's cold. Can | have another blanket?
Pardon? Could you say that again?
dessert + desert (Wüste)
Can | borrow your bike for the afternoon?
less +-ful: helpless + helpful
= dessert
Would you like mixed salad or potato salad?
= lots of explanation — to explain
| got an average grade - not high but not low.
My grades are sufficient to get into college.
My results were unsatisfactory. | must do the test again.
The teacher divided the class into two groups.
The geography of the country played an important role in its history.
Its a long journey. It takes 12 hours.
to do an apprenticeship to pass an exam
He has a basic knowledge of French.
advice + to advise
Please write to me about it in detail.
Please hurry! Come straight away!
government — to govern an experienced worker salary = Gehalt
You should get a minimum of seven hours’ sleep every night.
Anhang Vocabulary 127
So. 15. Feb. 16:40 a x