--- Seite 1 ---
Klett Business to Business

Englisch für Wirtschattstachleute

Gesamtdokumentation: 62 Seiten

Erstellt für Unterrichtsmaterialerstellung

--- Seite 2 ---
INTRODUCTIONS

Introducing yourself and your business

5] basic You will often find vourself meeting new people, both in the wortd of work and in your

ntroducing everyday life. it is important to be able to introduce yourself and your company

ch) 1 Listening: Nice to meet you!

El a On the first day of vocational college, Laura, gist - te

Max and Tarek are asked to introduce them- Job title

sees and their jobs In English. Listen to

i } Company

| their introductions and take notes about os = ;

. iF their jobs, companies, likes and dislikes. Liles =

“aS = dislikes

= b Work in small groups and introduce

Hi! I'm Sarah yourselves,

2 Get to know me

introducing „ Collect relevant words and phrases for your

own introduction.

- Personal details: hobbies, interests, future

plans

- Work details: job training, company,

products / services, education

’ Use your phone or a tablet to create a "Get to

know me-video. Work with a partner who

can help you prepare and film the video.

¥ COMMON MISTAKES _...__.___.. .-.. TIP ERTL rere renee

I'm of from Hamburg. ı + A'Get to know me'video is also some-

| art was born in Dresden. ' thing you could use for a job application

lavas born etre ata resehen ' Sometimes it is beneficial to stand out

in Dresden on 7 June 2002. ı from the crowd and this might be a good

I'm training / working as-event as an event way to do so.

manager.

| We are-specialiced specialise in

' providing ..

3 Listening: Introducing companies

Listen to these people introducing their companies. Take notes and compare them In class.

Work in small groups. Brainstorm ideas and think of a business you would like to set up.

Come up with a catchy name for It. Introduce your company to the other groups.

Consider the following questions:

- What line of business appeals to you? (fashion, advertising, tourism, catering, cycling

equipment, ...)

- What products or services do you offer?

. - What type of company Is It? (start-up, chain, family business, global player, ...)

1 Discuss with a partner: - What are some of the different roles and functions within your company?

- Where and when do you usually meet new people?

yo hd aay ; . - Why should customers choose your products or services?

- How do you go about introducing yoursetf and getting to know others?

- In general, do you feel comfortable meeting new people? Why or why not?

oO U 22x N DC

--- Seite 3 ---
Q Il

“basic

smalltalk

smalltalk

vocab @ You are Dr Sandra Kalsers assistant at Minerva International A visitor Merete Andersen, arrives

WORKSHOP B INTRODUCTIONS:

Small talk and visitors

Sometimes you may have to greet visitors at your company and make them feel at home

It may be necessary tO make introductions and to entertain them tor a while

1 Entertaining visitors

from Denmark. She has an appointment with Dr Kalser. incase Dr Kaiser Is delayed, she has

asked you to entertain Ms Andersen until she arrives. Role play the situation with a partner

good moming

good moming /how help?

my name / Merete Andersen / appointment

moment, please /ring her/ afraid /mot

answer / not arrive yet/ try her mobile / stuck

in traffic / here 15minutes like coffee / tea/

biscuits?

like / tea please

order it/ how flight?

no problems / on time/ only take an hour/

slight turbulence

first visit/ Augsburg? /how long / stay here?

yes/ first visit/ beautiful old city/ just today/

retum this evening

pity/ what weather like/ Copenhagen?

rain / not warm as here

very hot here /no rain/ thunderstorm

forecast/ like Financial Times / while wait?

thank you /have paper

Dr Kaiser / here soon

ihank you

b Work with a partner. Make up dialogues using the following prompts. Switch roles.

rapes) Sips journey pleasant / rather tedious / lots of turbulence / lots of traffic jams on the

motorway / long delay at airport

weather

sunny /overcast/ slight drizzle / torrential rain/fog/ gale-force winds /

snow/ cold for the time of year/ ghastly/ brilliant/ dreadful / awful

first visit to ...

oh no, many times once before but only for a few hours no, newer

hotel

nice and quiet / service excellent / rather noisy central /notvery

central /not convenient for exhibition centre/ superb restaurant

interests / sport

prefer soccer / tennis /rugby/swimming/.../ support ... club

oO U 22x N DC

INTRODUCTIONS

EXAM PRACTICE

Gespräch in der Fremdsprache - Unterhaltung über Themen des Ausbildungsbereichs

(Dauer ca. 10-15 Minuten)

Exam practice

Bereiten Sie zunächst Ihre Antworten auf die unten gestellten Fragen vor.

Üben Ste dann zu zweit Übemehmen Sie die Rollen Prüfer/-in und Kandidat/-in und ver-

suchen Sie, eine echte Unterhaltung zu führen und nicht nur ein Frage- und Antwortspiel.

Tauschen Sie nach einem Durchgang die Rollen

Prüfer/-in

Begrüßen Sie Ihren Kandidaten /Ihre Kandidatin. Beginnen Sie das Gespräch mit Fragen zu

seiner [ihrer Person und der Ausbildung.

Good moming afternoon ... How long have you been working for ...?

Could you introduce yourself, please? When did you start your training?

Where do you live? When does it finish?

Where are you doing your traineeship?

Stellen Sie dann möglichst offene Fragen zum Unternehmen:

Could you describe your firm? Where are its main markets - domestic, EU or

Is it a manufacturer or a service provider? overseas?

What are its main products or services? How well is this particular sector doing

Roughly how many people does it employ? currently?

Does it have subsidiaries or other branches?

Fragen Sie auch nach Details zur Ausbildung:

Where are you attending vocational school? Could you describe your daily routine?

Are you on block release or do you attend In your opinion, how could the training in your

school one day a week? company be improved?"

What are your favourite subjects? Could you describe the dual system of

Do you find vocational school useful in your vocational training in Germany?

work? When are you going to sit your final exam?

Could you tell us more about your work? What are your main subjects?

Which departments have you worked in? What field would you like to work in when you

Which did you prefer? Were there any

departments you didn't like?

have completed your training?

Sprechen Sie auch einige allgemeine Themen an:

What are your plans for the future (work, What were your first impressions?

further training, travel)? Are you interested in music or sport?

Have you ever been to the UK, USA or another | What are your hobbies?

English-speaking country?

“Thentien fur besonders Bute Kandidaten Kanddatrinen

Kandidat/-in

Beantworten Sie die Fragen Ihres Prüfers / Ihrer Priferin. Achten Sie darauf, möglichst

effizient, klar strukturiert und sprachlich präzise zu antworten: Vermeiden Sie unnötige

Ausschweifungen, glledem Sie Ihre Antwort mit Hilfe von Konnektoren (first of all, next,

moreover, also, ...) wenn nötig in mehrere Abschnitte und drücken Sie sich möglichst genau

und verständlich aus. Das bedeutet auch, Fachvokabular aus ihrer Branche anzuwenden.

Reagieren Sie freundlich und höflich.

--- Seite 4 ---
1 Enquiries in everyday life

a Think: When did you (or someone you know) have to find a potential supplier for a product

or service (e.g. an event location, caterer, printer, ...)? How did you find the necessary

information? What was your experience?

b Pair: Talk about your experiences with a partner. Write down tips on how to find relevant

information.

c Share: Share your results and experiences In class.

2 Looking for suppliers at work

a The Internet Is usually the most convenient way of finding suppliers in a business context,

but traditional sources of information are also still used,

Match the sources of Information (1-4) below with their German translation (A-D).

1 chambers of commerce

2 trade associations

3 trade fairs and exhibitions

4 business partners

A Messen und Ausstellungen

B Geschäftspartner

c Handeskammem

D Häandelsverbände

b In small groups, brainstorm products and/or services that are needed at your place of work.

Where would you find suitable suppliers for them?

oO U 22x N DC

#skillengquiry 1

sbasicengquiry

qu liry

Q Il

Business transactions usually start with an enquiry, There are two different kinds of

Written enquiries

enquiries. When making a general enquiry, You may asx for sales literature (Le

catalopues, brochures or leaflets), price USTs and nformatıon about business ter

(i.e. terms of payment and delivery, delivery times and discounts). In a specific enquiry,

you may ask for a detailed quotation or particulars of the goods or services requested

Structure of a detailed enquiry

Match the parts of a detailed enquiry In the box to the corresponding sentences (1-10) in

the letter below

reason for enquiry complimentary close subject line request for catalogue and price list

source of address appropriate salutation request for information on terms of payment and

delivery closing phrase further requests (e.g. samples, presentation, demonstration)

introduction of your firm

Sponsorship (1)

DearSir/Madam, 3

We saw your advertisement for racing bikes in the March issue of the German “Tour”

magazine. [3]

We are a language school based in Essen, Germany and regularly sponsor sports

events inthe Ruhr area, mainly cycling and running. |

As our sponsorship programme has been a resounding success with local athletes

for the past five years, we are now planning to branch out into regional and national

events. Therefore, we are considering commissioning high-quality racing bikes

custom-designed in our company colours and featuring our logo. (5

Kindly send us your latest catalogue and export price list, together with minimum

quantities forspecial designs. iM

Please alsolet us know your terms of payment and delivery and give us an

indication of your delivery tinves. [7

Are you planning on exhibiting your products at the [SPO Bike Fair in Munich this

year! We would be keen to visit your stand if'so. [a]

We look forward to hearing from you soon. [|

Yours sincerely, fie]

--- Seite 5 ---
WORKSHOP A ENQUIRIES

vskillletter 3 Enquiry by letter

ibenquiry Sle haben eine Ausbildung als Groß- und Außenhandelskaufmann /-frau mit der

D4 Zusatzquallfikation abgeschlossen und arbeiten bei der in Süddeutschland führenden

sskittemail 2 Enquiry by email

eskillenquiry a jessica is a trainee office management assistant who Is Boing to do an internship in Dublin.

egram She will occasionally need a car and is looking for a car-sharing company. Complete her email

prepositions 10, 4 company she found with 10 of the 12 prepositions below. Warenhauskette Kufstadt GmbH (Turmstr. 15, 86150 Augsburg). Sie suchen nach einem

alle

Innovativen Hersteller von Haarpflegeprodukten und sind auf Moreale Cosmetics Inc.

on/about at for from in in of on to to under with (255 Montreal Street, Burlington, VT 05401, USA) gestoßen. Ansprechpartner für den

Internationalen Verkauf Ist Chris Peters.

Ihre Vorgesetzte jasmin Kulzer (Purchasing Manager) bittet Sie, eine Anfrage als Brief

zu schreiben, Nutzen Sle Ihre Notizen aus dem Gespräch mit Ihr.

From: pessica Weber A

To: Cifee Transit-Share

Subject: Enquiry about Carsharing options in summer 20. - passende Betreffzeile

Dear Mr Taylor, — Bezug auf Internetseiten von Moreale Cosmetics

| recently visited your website which lists several car-sharing options. will be doing an Internship — Vorstellung unserer Firma mit Hinweis auf beiliegende

in Dublin (4) 1st july 2) 15th August 20_ and | am interested W obtaining information “@ Firmenbroschüre

low-budget car-sharing options, Could you please send me an overview of the cars available as an — Angebot über 10 Kisten Moreale TechOne Hoorgel (TOs 3.21) und

attachment and aquotation I renting one "© an hourly basis’ How many weeks IM advance 10 Kisten Moreale TechTwo Hoargel (TT / 327) einholen

do | need to book? Are there any additional fees to pay as lam IM 26 years of age?

Please provide me with all the necessary details, including your terms 9 business

| look forward |) receiving your reply

— Bitte um Informationen zu Liefer zeit und möglichen Rabatten

— Bitte um Angabe der Liefer- und Zahlungsbedingungen

- Nennung von Referenzen in Deutschland

Kind regards, = Anfrage ongemessen abschlie Ben

jessica Weber v - ‚Anlage Firmenbroschüre

sskilimemo b Sie arbeiten für die ÖfficeTec OHG, einem Großhändler für Computer in Nimberg. Sie haben

eine Anfrage eines schottischen Einzeihändlers erhalten, Leser Sie die Anfrage und erstellen

Sie einen Vermerk auf Deutsch für ihre Vorgesetzte Frau Arzu Yavuz. 4 Types of discounts

Match each type of discount to the correct definition.

Front: tan kcCones mi cash discount early order discount introductory discount quantity discount trade discount

To: Arzu Yavuz

Date: 12th April 20. 1. Your company wants to sell new products.

Sublect: Enquiry about STB 3 and STB 4 monkors 2. Customers who order weil in advance should be rewarded.

Dear Ms Yavuz. 3. Customers should be encouraged to pay within a few days.

4. You should grant this discount to retailers.

We saw your advertisement for the STB 3 and new STB 4 monitors in the lapest issue of Computer 5. You should erant this discount for large orders.

Online and would like to ask you for further details.

We are achain of retailers for high-end computers and monitors with 10 outlets In Scotland.

Could you please send us a quotation for 200 STB 3 monitors and a sample of your new STB 4 PR CUMIMUN MISTAKES „ nnnnuununnnnnnnnunnannnunnununnnenennuanennnnnnen =

Monitor for test purposes? We would also appreciate information on your terms of delivery and 1 1. Enquiry for about .. 8. We will send it to you in a seperate separate '

Payment, a5 well a5 any discounts ' 2. You have been resommended-us email.

Lastiy may we also request your latest catalogue and price list? recommended to us by ... 9, How What are your terms of payment?

Ee u ea aT eee ' 3. Weare specialized specialising in... 10. A visit of from your representative ...

Yours sincerely, | 4 A mayer major supplier 11. We would-be appreciated We would

lan McComb | § We are interesting interested in appreciate it if you .

Purchasing As start | Compuline Ltd | 21 Peterson Arcade | Glasgow Gee San | Scotland |rwwecompuane.co,. uk T ' 6 An offer about for ... 12.4 A prompt reply would be appreciated.

7. Please send us a prospect brochures © 13. We hope to hearing hear from you soon.

catalogue. 14. We look forward to hear hearing from you.

oO U 22x N DC

--- Seite 6 ---
Telephone enquiries

Telephone enquiries are usually the fastest way to get the necessary information about a

supplier or a product. In a telephone call, it is often easier to ask directly for special offers

This is especially true if you have already had previous contact with the supplier

1 Asking for catalogues and prices

Listen to the dialogue and complete the transcript with the missing words or expressions.

joan Shedd:

joan Shedd:

joan Shedd:

joan Shedd:

joan Shedd:

joan Shedd:

joan Shedd:

Good afternoon. Wedgewood Promotional Items Ltd, Joan Shedd j@.

How can | help you?

Hello, this Is Chris Halter from HeyBikes in Berlin. We are really © some of

your promotional items. Could you send us your ® catalogue and a price

list?

Certainty. Would you like me to send it via emailor @)?

I'd prefer an ©, please. You can send It directly to my boss.

What's your boss's emall address? Could you please spell it out for me?

Sure. it’s @). I'll just repeat It: m.

Thanks a lot. I've got it I'll send it right away.

I'd also like to ask if youcan ® some promotional items which we could

use asa W for our new customers.

Well, USB sticks and power banks ™@ with logos are still the most

popular Iterns after regular pens, of course. Our catalogue includes some

very Ai offers.

Thanks. That sounds good. We're looking forward to @ your email then

You're welcome. Is there anything else | can help you with?

No thank you - not at W. Goodbye.

Goodbye and thanks a lot for calling.

oO U 22x N DC

Fakillimeme

enquiry

#5 mill

phonecall

2 Listening to a voicemail message

ENQUIRIES WORKSHOP E

You are doing an internship in the sales department of aly.

Solarspeicher AG in Rostock. Your company is a leading

supplier of battery storage systems for solar power.

Mark Fuchs, the head of the department, asks you

to listen to a volcernall message and inform him of all

the relevant details.

Listen carefully and take notes about:

1. name of company and contact person

2. products /services the company offers.

3. required product and quantity

4. further information needed

b Write a memo about the phone call for Mark Fuchs in German.

3 Role play: Enquiry over the phone

You work in the Personnel Department of BC Business Consultants GmbH, a large German

consultancy firm based in Frankfurt. Your company is planning to send its executives on

intensive language training courses abroad. A business associate of yours has recommended

Regent School in Edinburgh, Scotland. Role play the call with a partner.

identify yourself and state reason for calling.

Refer to business associate.

Ask about course offers,

Mainly one-to-one, but what group courses

are offered?

Lesson duration? 45 or 60min?

Not sure yet, maybe 6-10.

How many hours per day?

Costs?

yourname@BCConsultants ...net

Thanks for help.

Answer the call

Very pleased to have been recommended.

Glad to help,

What courses exactly? Group or one-to-one?

Small groups of up to six participants.

Can be combined with individual tuition

Generally 60min, from 9am to dor 5pm

How many students?

Various options, for example 3 hours group

and 3 hours individual tuition.

Happy to send price list by email

Email address?

Thanks. Price list and PDF brochure will be

sent shortly

--- Seite 7 ---
Q Il

BUSINESS SCENARIO

ENQUIRIES

Business scenario Review

Sie sind Assistent/-in des Vertriebsleiters Thomas jakobs bei der MTZ-Maschinenfabrik in Before you test yourself in Exam proctice, take a few moments to reflect on what you

Hannover. Das Unternehmen hat Viele Kunden aus Großbritannien und den USA have just Learned. Then make a follow-up plan: What do you need to improve before the

Herr jakobs hat eine Kachricht in Englisch auf dem Anrufbeantworter final exam? How will you go about getting there? You cancheck again after Exam practice

Fassen Sie die wichtigsten Inhalte der Nachricht für Herrn Jakobs stichwortartig auf Deutsch

Zusammen.

ebasite nquiry In this unit, you have learned how to ...

write enquiries by email or letter | make a telephone enquiry | ask about discounts, terms of

payment and delivery, delivery times, sales literature, references | write a memo in German

about a telephone enquiry

1 Considering these topics and tasks, ask yourself:

Ze Tr Vocabulary Do I know the relevant words and phrases needed to ...

email write enquiries by email or letter | make a telephone enquiry | ask about

discounts, terms of payment and delivery, delivery times, sales literature,

references?

Can | understand and use these relevant words and phrases confidently in

speaking and in writing?

Can | adapt my language to the medium channel | use (letter, email, phone)?

pl So a a Ges

fgramtenses Grammar When writing and/or speaking, did | come across a common source of

Sie H ko igram grammar mistakes?

© Step 2 rear fos hoa = prapesmions lf so, what was it and how can! practise and improve in this particular area?

Deutsch gegeben haben, finden Sie - ia hee roy cation eek illenquiry Writing Do I know how to structure an enquiry?

auf Ihrem Schreibtisch eine Notiz. es ivität am Nachmittag in soso clases What do I need to consider when writing a general or specific enquiry?

Erledigen Sie die in der Notiz genannten Hannower recherchieren What do I need to consider when writing a memo in German?

Aufgaben nn Sie meinen - eo era spans an) What common mistakes are often made when writing enquiries?

eine entsprechende Mall an Herm Jakobs. Nähe des ii

‘ie kill Speakin Can | make an enquiry on the phone?

Mir bitte dann per Mail zuschicken. phonecall ee ee

Danke Methods / Do I know how to spell correctly and can | take down names/emailaddresses/ |

Thomas Jakobs Strategies numbers correctly?

Step 3 4 Schreiben Sie für Herm Jakobs einen

Entwurf für eine E-Mail an den Anrufer und

#skillemail beachten Sie dabei folgende Informationen, 2 use your answers from 1 to create a learning and revision plan.

email

die Sie mit Ihrem Vorgesetzten abgestimmt haben. WHAT? HOW? WHEN?

What do I need to work on? What will I do to improve? When do I want to

complete this?

— freuen uns auf den Besuch und das Wiedersehen |

— Zeigen gerne die Produktionshallen und die neuesten Produkte

- Togesoblaufplan mit Freizeitaktivität und gemeinsamen Abendessen TER,

erstellt ___ TIP ins ee PS ee a Seer

- Bitte um Rückmeldung, ob der Plan passt f\ - ei

- kein Dolmetscher nötig ‘ Practising on online sites can help to improve your grammar. Usually you will get direct feed-

~ bei Fragen jederzeit melden | back and an explanation of the answer. Try to make it a habit to practise grammar online at

| least once or twice a week.

- Tagesoblaufplan angehängt nn on nn TTT ey :

oO UL Lo U DC aw 27 &

--- Seite 8 ---
EXAM PRACTICE ENQUIRIES EXAM PRACTICE

Exam practice Text 2

Papel Cte eee : In diesem Text Ist jewells nur eine der drei nachstehend vorgeschlagenen Formen korrekt.

1 Sprachergänzungstest (Bearbeitungszeit 25 Minuten) Setzen Sie die richtige Lösung ein.

Text 1

Setzen Sie 20 der. 73 angegebenen Wörter i die Lücken Ces textes ein. Almost every consumer will have a problem with a faulty purchase at some point.

also brochure caught condition customers inform leading like logo might near According to a recent survey W) the Office of Fair Trading, 42 per cent of the adult

order page payment possible present price services sorry those website population reported @ cause for dissatisfaction with goods or services over the

wondering why last twelve ®.

In the United Kingdom as a whole, around 21 million people & about 40 million

consumer complaints 8 year. W complaints are 7 small purchases, but the

survey showed six categories of complaints ©) the average price of the purchase

® over £) 00,

Dear Sir/Madam, These @ furniture, household appliances, cars, car servicing, building and

holidays. Between 1, these six categories made up around 25 million @.

Over 80 per cent of consumers ®) complaints about high-value goods and

services took the matter #).Byfarthe a course of action was 4 the supplier.

A @? number contacted the manufacturer and # few went to external bodies

attention. such as an advice centre or trade organisation. People with complaints about

services were 7 unlikely @ a satisfactory result from 3 initial complaint: the

satisfaction rate 3 forholidays and 22 per cent for building work.

window-cleaning 5 in our area, with numerous ©. This year, we would |F to give One message of the survey was @ persistence generally 3. People 2 refused

@ an initial rejection of their complaint and took further action were more U to

be successful. In most cases, 28 people Qs with their complaint, 3 to the head

® be a suitable gift. office or speaking to the manager.

Enquiry about leather diaries

We have visited your 1 and your stylish leather diar bes in gilt boxes have 2 our

The attached company 3 will show you that we are one olthe 5 prov iders of

our customers aspecial ® for Christmas and are ® whether your leather diaries

This is we would like toask you to email us brochures and @ lists and W us

about your terms of ® and delivery. Please ® state your delivery times. We are

1 . of, for, wi 18

thinking of an W in the range of 1000 diaries. We trust that it willbe 4 to have our paste all pan einiger

companys name and ww displayed prominently on the front W of the calendars 3. months, month's, month 15. common, most common, was only 18 per cent

4, have, has, were having commonest 23. that, so that, although

inside the diaries. 5. each, any, every 16. contact, to contact, 24, pay, is paying, pays

We look forward to hearing from you in the @ future > ee — 7 esse little 23 en.

ge & where, which, what 18. the, an, a accepted

in 9, were, has been, was 19. particular, particularly, 27. likely, likelier, likeliest

. . BRENNER 10. are being, are, will be particularity 28. this, that, these

Glasblank GmbH & Co. KG 11. they, their ti 20. obtaini btain, 29. have persisted, persisted,

Stefan Breidenbach 12. complaint’s, complaints, to obtain were persisting

complaint 21. its, his, their 30. to write, wrote, writing

Stefan Breidenbach

Marketing Manager

oO U. 2X uU ode |

--- Seite 9 ---
2 Vermerk über ein Telefongespräch (Bearbeitungszeit 20 Minuten)

Im folgenden Gespräch sind Sie Pla Poselleck von der Firma City Tours in Hamburg.

Sle erhalten einen Anruf von einem potenziellen Kunden aus Birmingham. Verfolgen Sie

das Gespräch und fertigen Sie für die Leiterin der Abteilung Bildungsprogramme, Anita

Schwarzkopf, eine Gesprächsnotiz auf Deutsch an.

Pia Poselleck Alan

City Tours Hamburg. Guten Tag. | u | 4

I'm afraid Ms Schwarzkopf is not in today. Maybe | can help you?

Certainly. What exactly would you like to know?

Yes, that's correct. .

I'm not quite sure, to be honest. Ms Schwarzkopf has recently changed some of the

tours, I'm sure she will be able to give you more detailed information when she’s in

tomorrow. Can | get her to call you back?

Oh, I'm sure she can. Is that 3pm your time?

Yes, we're one hour ahead. Could you give me your contact details, please? 5

Yes, I've got that.

Do you have an extension?

No problem. I'll pass it on to Ms Schwarzkopf and ask her to get back to you tomorrow,

Is there anything else | can do for you today?

Yes, as far as lim aware we do. I'll put that in the memo for Ms Schwarzkopf, She knows

all the details and will definitely be able to help you with all your questions.

Yes, certainly. Il do that

You're very welcome, Goodbye now and have a good day.

City Tours

Gesprachsvermerk

FOr...

Verfasst von: ... am: ..

Gesprächspartner: .,

Betreff: ...

oO U 22x N DC

3 Kurzgefasste schriftliche Mitteilung (Bearbeitungszeit 30 Minuten)

Siea

rbeiten in der Exportabtellung des Bettwäsche-Herstellers Schlafkomfort Weber GmbH,

E-Mail-Adresse: schlafkomfortwebergonline...de. Ihre Firma hat den beiliegenden Brief aus

Großbritannien erhalten. Ihr Vorgesetzter hat Sie gebeten, diesen Brief per E-Mail selbst-

ständig zu beantworten. Er hat folgende Notiz dazugelegt:

schicken Sie ols Antwort bitte eine kurze, ober freundliche E-Mail on Frau Johnson

Wir bedauern, unserem Katalog totsdehlich aus Versehen eine Preisliste für den

Endverbraucher beigelegt zu haben

Wir schicken die Preisliste für den Handel als Anloge

Als Mengenrabott gewähren wir 15% bei Bestellungen von mehr als 100 Stück und

25% bei Bestellungen von über 500 Stück

Die Bavariabettwäsche ist sofort lieferbar. Wir freuen uns auf Ihren Auftrag

Schlafkomfort Weber GmbH Shumbervale Bed Linen Ltd

Sirelitzer Landweg 73 27 Shepherd's Drove

19053 Schwerin High Wycombe

GERMANY HPI 15XA

Email: sumberwell@outlook..com

Dear Sir/Madam, 15 January 20.

Thank you for your spring catalogue which we received a few days ago

We are especially interested in the Bavaria Country Style blue and pink check duvet

and pillowcase sets

However, the price list you enclosed appears to list end-user rather than trade prices

and contains no indication of quantity discounts

Please send us this information as soon as possible

If prices and discounts are competitive, we may be able to place a substantial order.

With best regards,

Lisa Johnson

Lisa johnson

Purchasing Manager

--- Seite 10 ---
Ql xa

Written offers

ebasicoffer Offers are either soliated (sent in response to an enquiry) or unsolicited (sent for

marketing PUPP Ses Un the off chance that the ndwidtial or ¢ TT bey be interested

STARTER

4] ' OFF ERS in the Foods or services offered). Detailed, specific offers are often called quotations

Offers for work to be carried out take the form of cost estimates. A solicited offer should

. contain all the information necessary for the potential customer to reach a deasion

u sskilioffer I Structure of a detailed offer

offer Match the different parts of a detalled offer to the comesponding sentences (1-13) In the

emall below.

details of products or services offered closing phrase termsof delivery attachment

offer validity period salutation complimentary close subjectline terms of payment

reference to enquiry additional information prices and discounts delivery period

From: . A

Subject: Offer for custom-designed racing bikes [1]

Attachment: Catalogue and price list (2

Dear Mr ... Ms ...,

We refer to your enquiry regarding our custom-desiened racing bikes and are pleased to submit

the following offer. HM]

We can offer you three different types of racing bikes in various colours. and designs which can be

CUStOMised acc onding to your requirements, We also offer a wide range of accessories

1 Offers in your company

4 Think: Does your company offer products or services to individual customers or other

companies? What types of offers have you come across? Did the offers lead to orders

afterwards? Why/why not?

b Pair: Tell your partner what experience you have In sending out and receiving offers.

c Share: Share your experiences and results in class

2 Types of offers

What type of offer is presented in each of the following situations?

limited offer offer without engagement binding offer

1. Aproducer of office supplies has sent an offer to a new customer and expressly offered

a certain amount of stationery for a certain price.

2. Aphotographer who wants to expand his work into advertising has sent round an offer

to take photographs for a number of different advertising agencies.

3. An online perfume shop is offering free delivery to customers who buy more than

50 euros’ worth of cosmetics and perfume in the run-up to Christmas.

GW DC

Attached to this email you will find our catalogue giving you More information on our products

and designs, as well a5 the colours we offer. [5]

We would ask you to please send us a document detailing your specific requirements, If possible,

In eps-format

For prices see our Catalogue and price list. As you would be a new customer to our company, we

are delighted to be able to offer you a 2% introductory discount. je

Regarding our usual terms of payment, we would expect 50% upon placement of the order and

50% upon delivery. [7

Our prices are quoted EXW Copenhagen, [8]

Delivery can be effected up to two months after receiptoforder. [#

Our racing bikes are transported In heavy-duty cardboard bowes and, depending on the size of

your order, also on pallets. [1]

This offer is valid until the end of this month. [11]

lf you need more detailed information, please do not hesitate to contact us

Although weare not going to have a stand at the SPO Bike Fair in Munich, a representative of

our company vill be arrending the trade fair and would be happy to meet you 00 discuss further

details,

We look forward to doing business with you. [12]

Yours sincerely [13]

--- Seite 11 ---
WORKSHOP A

sskillemai 2 An unsolicited offer =| vskilimemo 4 Offer by letter

offer The company AB Filter Technology sends an unsolicited offer to Motorenwerke Böblingen. Chris Peters von Moreale Cosmetics Inc. hat die Anfrage der Kufstadt GmbH erhalten und

=| Complete the email with words from the box. sendet ein entsprechendes Angebot an die deutsche Firma. Geben Sie Ihrer Vorgesetzten

jasmin Kulzer die wesentlichen Informationen In einem Vermerk auf Deutsch welter.

@O@uzkz OW

competitve brochure trial attachment quality attention submit order payment

From: AB Filter Technology “4

To: Motorenwerke Böblingen

Subject: Offer for high-quality filter systems

Attachment: Company brochure

Dear Sir or Madam,

Our company AB Filter Technology inc, has over 40 years of expertise in filter and control

systems. We [ professional filer systems at the most IE prices. The aim of our company Is to

# the requirements of all our customers working in a variety of industries.

We produce high-pressure filters as well a5 refill cartridges of an ourstanding 4. We would also

like to draw your § to our new fine-dust particle filters which reduce emissions by nearly 20%.

in che = you willfinda 7 containing ilistrations and corresponding technical specifications

which should give you a El overview of our range of products. Wewould ak you to send us your

precise requirements so that we can @ an offer for customised products. Upon request, our

engineers are also available to provide more information.

You can test out and examine the extraordinary quality of our products by submitting a @ onder

for standard samples of our wide range of fikers. We usually i within a month

The price of our filters depends on the volume of your @ . For first orders our terms of payment

are cash with order. Regular customers are allowed open account terms. For larger orders we are

abe to 7% a quantity discount.

We would be pleased no send you a WW forthe quantity and type of filters you need

Our preferred method of B2B is WI by electronic funds transfer (EFT)

AB Filter Technology inc. assures you that your order will be to your full satisfaction and look

forward to a you a5 our customers.

Yours sincerely,

Charlome Heywood

EU Sales ¥

Reply to an enquiry

You work for Werbesysteme Frank GmbH, a company that produces digital billboards for a

variety of different industries. After receiving an enquiry from an Irish retailer (Patrick jones

from Billboard Inc.), you write a reply Informing them that it will sadly not be possible to

send them an offer. Use the following prompts your purchasing manager has given you.

- Anrede; Dank für die Anfrage

- Hinweis auf große Nachfrage für diese Produkte und Zusatzmaterialien

- deshalb große Knappheit an diesen Produkten (Lieferengpässe)

- leider keine Annahme von neuen Aufträgen; Sie melden sich, wenn neve Ware

eingetroffen ist, und stellen Lieferung bei neuen Woreneingang in Aussicht

- Bitte um Verständnis; höflicher Schluss

MOREALE COSMETICS INC.

255 Montreal Street, Burlington, VT 0540 1, USA

Kulstadt GmbH 20 November 20.

jasmin Kulzer

Turmstr, 15

56150 Augsburg

Germany

Offer for TechOne and TechTwo hair gel

Dear Ms Kulzer,

Thank you for your interest in our products and your enquiry of 7 November 20..

Our oo mpany has customers throughout Europe and we also have long-standing

business relation ships with some of the big hairdressing chains in Germany. On our

website you can find reviews from customers giv ing feedbackonour produc ts.

We are pleased to submit the following offer for the products you requested:

tem Quant Price per item Total

Moreale TechOne hair gel (10/321) 10 cases $i 7i/case $2710.00

Moreale TechTwo hair gel (1/327) 10 cases $299/case $2,990.00

Our usual terms of payment are cash with order.

We would like to draw your attention to our quantity discount of 2% for orders of

30 or more cases of our hair cosmetics. As this is your first order, we can grant you

an additional 5% introductory discount.

Delivery can be effected immediately on receipt of order and will be carried out by

air freight. Our prices are quoted CIP Airport Albany:

In case you have not done business with US firms before, we would like to draw your

attention to certain formalities which need to be carried oul beforehand. As a

German importer, itis necessary for you to register for an EORI number, which

authorises you to import goods into Germany.

This offer is subject to confirmation. By placing an order, you agree to ourterms

and conditions, Our current offer is valid until June this year.

We hope this offer meets your expectations and we are looking forward to doing

business with you.

Yours sincerely,

Chris Peters

Sales Manager

Moreale Cosmetics

--- Seite 12 ---
sk illemail

“skilloffer

5 Being more polite

Re-write the following sentences in a more polite way.

. We do not have these products on sale at the moment.

. We want to have your terms of payment and delivery.

. We enclose brochures and our latest price list

. We cannot offer you these products anymore.

. Your order will be executed promptly.

. We cannot give you a discount for this number of products.

, Can you send us some samples of these products?

. You can contact us if you have any other questions.

Ss mW me La ho =

Germans tend to be quite direct in their communication. It is therefore useful to practise

being more polite in preparation for interacting with foreien business partners.

6 Exclusion clauses

Exclusion clauses (Freizeichnungsklausein) are often used in offers to exclude or limit the

liability of business partners. Match the following clauses with their German equivalents.

1 subject to change A eültie/fest bis ...

2 prices are subject to change B Preisänderungen vorbehalten

3 while stock lasts c solange der Vorrat reicht/ Lieferung

4 non-binding offer vorbehalten

6 the offer is valid until ... D freibleibendes Angebot

E freibleibend / Anderungen vorbehalten

7 Offer by email

Rahul Khan, sales manager at Guptha Rubbers PLC (-khan@euptharubbers...com) has been

asked by Ruth Bennet from The Bike Factory Europe GmbH (ruth.bennet@thebikefactory....

de) in Germany for detalis of Guptha Rubbers’ new range of Badger X3 tyres with reflective

sidewalls and anti-puncture system. He decides to respond to her telephone call immediately.

Write the emall for Mr Khan and include the following details.

- sdlutation

— thank you for interest in our products

- attachment: new leaflet ag jpeg with all technical details of the new tyres and current

prices

- prices generally quoted FCA

- weoffer an introductory discount of 10% for a first order exceeding an order

volume of 50,000 tyres

- samples can be provided on request

= do not hesitate to contact Mr Khan for further information

- goodwill sentence

= complimentary close

oO U 22x N DC

#skillietter & Offer by letter

offer Alba Gomez, Einkaufsleiterin von Nova Solar in Malaga, Spanien (Calle Maria 25,

29013 Malaga), hat eine Nachricht auf dem Anrufbeantworter der Verkaufsabteilung

f der Solarspeicher AG (Spitalstr 15, 18057 Rostock) hinterlassen.

schreiben Sie im Namen des verantwortlichen Abteilungsleiters bei der Solarspeicher AG,

Mark Fuchs, ein Angebot per Brief an Frau Gomez. Berücksichtigen Sie die folgenden

Informationen

— Bezug auf Nachricht auf Anrufbeantworter

— Information über Solar 5 Batterien: hohe Lebensdauer, kurze Ladezeiten

- Hinweis auf erfolgreiche Zusammenarbeit mit Firmen in der ganzen Welt

— Preisongebot:

— 2.500 Euro pro Stück

— bei Abnahme von 500 Stick: Mengenrabatt von 5%

— Einführungsrabatt von 10%

— Zahlungsbedingungen

— 10 Toge netto bei Erstkunden

— bei weiteren Geschäften Bezahlung innerhalb von 60 Togen

— ‚Zahlung on Deutsche Bank

- Lieferbedingungen: ab Werk, in Holzboxen auf Paletten geliefert

- Lieferzeit: 3 Wochen nach Auftragseingang

- Gorantiezeit: 24 Monate (mehr Informationen dazu in FAQs auf Webseite)

= ‚Anlage: information zu Versandkosten

= mit Post gesendet: Muster der Solar 5 Batterie mit technischen

Informationsmoterialien

= Gültigkeit des Angebots: 1 Monat

= Hoffnung auf gute Geschäftsberiehungen

- Bitte um Kontaktaufnahme bei Fragen

- freundlicher Schluss

» Writing an offer

» Whenever possible personalise the salutation.

* Thank the enquirer for his / her interest in your products / services.

* Say something positive about your company and/ or your products.

* Include all the necessary information on

- goods / services offered

= quantity

= prıces and discounts

- terms of delivery and terms of payment

- delivery period

- validity of the offer

« Provide all the information requested and any additional information that might be

helpful

* Conclude your offer with a phrase designed to make the customer feel positive towards

your firm.

--- Seite 13 ---
WORKSHOP B

~~, fio

#skilimermo

el j

@O@uzkz OW

Telephone offers

fs kill

phonedcall

honed all

A telephone offer is very effective to speed up business communication and to make

it more personal. With real-time conversations, business partners can clarify possible

questions and emphasise certain offers. Compromses can be reached more easily when

| At the trade fair

AS a representative of the German company Elektro Kiingenbach GmbH, a manufacturer

of professional dishwashers, Paul Rund rings the organisers of the trade falr Eatery In

The Hague, the Netherlands. He is enquiring as to whether there is any chance of exhibiting

at the fair

Listen to the telephone conversation and take notes on:

1. customers at the trade falr and which sectors they are from

. Participating countries

. Where to register for the trade fair

. deadline for registration

payment details

. Stand sizes

equipment for the stand

, advertising material

. Catering

Paul Rund

Trade Fair

Hello. My name's Paul Rund from Germany. | am phoning on behalf of the

manager of the German company Elektro Klingenbach. We read about your trade

fair Eatery and we are very interested in exhibiting in The Hague.

We are a leading company in manufacturing professional dishwashers and

related products.

Unfortunately not, but we have heard a great deal about this trade fair and

thought it would be a good idea to attend.

Which countries do most of the visitors come from?

How do we register to exhibit at the fair? And when do we have to register?

I know the exhibition itself takes place in September

We hope to not only exhibit our products but also to showcase how our

dishwashers function. For this reason, we would need a bigger stand. Could you

please tell me about the size of the stands as well as the equipment, lighting etc.

That's good to know as we have very specific requirements conceming electrical

power and water supply. Is there any chance we could publish ads on your

website?

My last question concems catering. How does that work?

Thank you very much for all this information, you have been most helpful | would

appreciate it if you could send me all this in an email

Thank you again. Have a nice day.

Use your notes to write a memo for your colleagues in German.

2 Discussing details of an offer

OfficeTec OHG has received an enquiry from CompuOne, a Scottish retailer However, the

German company still has some questions in order to be able to submit a comprehensive

offer. Act out the following dialogue.

Sie rufen an und nehmen Bezug auf die

Anfrage zu Computermonitoren.

Sie freuen sich über Interesse an STB 3 und

STB 4 Monitoren

Weisen Sie auf möglichen Händlerrabatt von

10% auf Listenpreis bei gewünschten

Umfang der Bestellung hin.

Lieferung wird sofort bei Bestellung aus-

gelöst und dauert ca.3 Wochen

Hinweis auf evtl. Zölle bei Export nach GB;

Preise FOB Hamburg.

Zustimmung, als Kompromiss, weil Problem

bei STB 4: Lieferschwierigkeiten aufgrund

der hohen Nachfrage.

Alternative: Angebot des STB 5.

Neves Modell STB 5: 50 Pfund teurer, aber

interessante Zusatzfunktionen.

Kompensation: Einführungsrabatt

Angebot einer sofortigen Zusendung des

neuen Modells als Testgerät

Hinweis, dass Sie sich persönlich darum

kümmerm werden

Lieferung des Testgeräts bis Ende der

Woche,

Garantiezeit normalerweise 2 Jahre, für

neues Modell 1 jahr.

Zahlungszeitraum won 30 Tagen.

Hinweis auf obigen Händlerrabatt

Sie werden das Angebot sofort formulieren

und per E-Mail zusenden

Answering the phone, lan McComb

speaking.

Thanks for sending the latest catalogue and

price list

Most pleased

Question about delivery times of the 200

STB 3 and shipping charges

Doesn't want to pay shipping charges.

Wants shipment CIP Edinburgh.

Disappointed about delivery problems.

Question about features and price difference

in comparison to the STB 4 model

Accept proposal of replacement of STB 4.

if you are satisfied with it, 20 units of the

STB 5 are required in Edinburgh the follow-

ing month to launch the new monitor

campaign of CompuOne

Question about warranty period of devices

ordered.

information that CompuOne normally pays

30 days net, 7 days 2%. Ask about your

partner's procedure.

You need the offer by email urgently.

Thank your partner and say goodbye

--- Seite 14 ---
BUSINESS SCENARIO

Business scenario

Die schwedische Firma Lantbruk AB (Klockargatan 7, SE-12123 Stockholm, Schweden)

vertreibt Landmaschinen verschiedenster Art in ganz Schweden. Der deutsche Land

maschnenhersteller Sorplios GmbH (ScHhwedenstr.15, 30161 Hannover) St an einer Zusam

menarbeit mit dem schwedischen Betrieb interessiert. AS Auszubildende/-r in der Abtei

lune für Auslandspeschäfte werden Sie von Ihrem Abteilungsleiter Robert Bauer pebeten

sich mit dieser Firma zu beschäftigen, um eventuell Geschäftskontakte zu ermöglichen

Auf der Internetseite der Firma Lantbruk finden Sie unter der Rubrik „About us" folgenden

Text. Übertragen Sie die wichtigen Informationen ins Deutsche.

Step 1

LANTBRUK MACHINES SHOP SERVICE ABOUT US CONTACT

Our company is a leading detributor of tractors, harvesters and other agricultural machines in ä

Sweden, In addition to our outstanding products, our company Is also well knoven for its expertise

and service which comprises the maintenance of machines as well a5 the delivery of spare parts.

We have over a century of experience in agricultural machines and are in a position to custome

our machines to make them best suited for your purposes. With our machines, agricukural work

can be made much easier - and with much more accurate results ¥

eae Die Sorelos GmbH möchte einen schwedischen Verkaufsberater sowie einen Techniker der

Firma Lantbruk zu einem Besuch einladen, Ihr Vorgesetzter, Herr Bauer, bittet Sie, beider

Firma Lantbruk anzurufen und die Möglichkeit einer Zusammenarbeit zu klären. Führen Sie

das Gespräch mit einem Partner/einer Partnerin — Role card B,p. 118

Role Card A - Landmaschinenhersteller Sorglos GmbH

Rufen Sie für die deutsche Firma bei der schwedischen Firma an.

Legen Sie das Anliegen Ihrer Firma dar (Sorglas GmbH sucht einen Vertriebspartner für ihre

Landmaschinen in Schweden)

Antworten Sie auf die Frage: Vorführung verschiedener Produkte ist möglich.

Bieten Sie Gespräche und Vorführung von Maschinen mit den Technikern und dem

Verkaufsleiter im Hauptsitz der Firma in Hannover an

Vereinbaren Sie für Ihren Chef ein Verhandiungseesprach, wo Themen wie Lieferung, Service,

Bezahlung etc. besprochen werden können.

Legen Sie gemeinsam Zeitpunkt und Dauer des Besuchs fest.

Bieten Sie an, die Kosten des Besuchs zu übernehmen.

Verabschieden Sie sich angemessen

Nach dem erfolgreichen Besuch des schwedischen Vertriebsmitarbeiters in Hannover sendet

die Sorelos GmbH ein Angebot für Emtemaschinen an die Firma Lantbruk. Verfassen Sie das

Angebot für Ihren Vorgesetzten Robert Bauer und nutzen Sie dazu seine Notizen.

- Bezug ouf den Besuch im Hauptsitz des Landmaschinenher stellers

- Angebot für 5 Erntemaschinen Modell EM23

= Verweis auf die Maschinen und deren technische Angaben in der Anlage

- Zahlung: 1/3 bei Auftragserteilung, 1/3 bei Lieferung, 1/3 30 Tage nach Lieferung

- Lieferung FOB Hamburg, Lieferfrist zwei Monate noch Bestellung

- Gorontiezeit: 2 Jahre; Hotline für sofortige Lieferung von Verschleißteilen

= Gültigkeit des Angebots: 1 Monat

- angemessener Schluss

oO U 22x N DC

sbasicoffer

offer

fgramtenses

‘gram

prepositions

rekilimemea

#skillermall

#+kllllerter

phonecall

Review

Before you test yourself in ram proctice, take a few moments to reflect on what you

have just learned. Then make a follow-up plan: What do you need to improve before the

final exam? How will you go about getting there? You can check again after Exam practice

In this unit, you have learned how to ...

write an offer by email or by letter | explain inability to make an offer | make a telephone

offer | mention terms of payment and delivery in an offer | write amemo in German about

a telephone offer | have dialogues on the subject of offers

1 Considering these topics and tasks, ask yourself:

Do I know the relevant words and phrases needed to...

write offers by email or letter | submit an offer by telephone | offer discounts,

state terms of payment and delivery, provide sales literature, references?

Vocabulary

Can | understand and use these relevant words and phrases confidently in

speaking and writing?

Can | adapt my language to the medium [channel | use (letter, email, phone)?

Grammar When writing and/or speaking, did | come across a common source of

grammar mistakes?

If so, what was it and how can | practise and improve in this particular area?

Writing Do I know how to structure an offer?

What da I need to consider when writing a solicited or unsolicited offer?

What do | need to consider when writing a memo in German?

How do | express politeness in my letters and emails?

Speaking

Methods /

Strategies

Can | make an offer for different items and services on the phone?

Are the phrases | use polite enough for communication in official business

correspondence?

2 Use your answers from 1 to create a learning and revision plan:

WHAT? HOW? WHEN?

What do I need to work on? What will I do to improve? When do | want to complete

this?

TP NE

‘ Try to listen to native English speakers in order to find out how they avoid being too direct

| and how they use standard phrases to be more polite in conversations. Replace negative

| words with more positive ones.

--- Seite 15 ---
~~, fio

EXAM PRACTICE

Exam pra ctice 2 Vermerk über ein Telefongespräch (Bearbeitungszeit 20 min)

1 Geschäftsbrief nach Stichworten (Bearbeitungszeit 45 Minuten)

Sie machen eine Ausbildung bei der Leuchtreklamefirma GLOW GmbH (10178 Berlin,

Lampenstr. 2). Aufgrund ihrer innovativen Desiens und ökologischen Herangehensweise

(z.B. stromsparende LED-Leuchtröhren, minimale Verpackung) Ist die Firma auf dem

deutschen Markt sehr erfolgreich und möchte jetzt innerhalb Europas expandieren.

Letzte Woche erhielten Sie eine Anfrage der Itallenischen Eventiocation Illumina

(20090 Milano, Via Delle Rose 2, Geschäftsführer Paolo Santini), die eine Außenwand Ihres

Gebäudes mit Leuchtreklame gestalten möchte.

Herr Santini bat um ein Angebot zu verschiedenen Desiens und Größen sowie Informationen

Das deutsche Einrichtungshaus COSY in Berlin möchte sein Sortiment mit marokkanischen

Artikeln erweitern und hatte bereits eine Anfrage an einen marokkanischen Händler

gesendet. Um mit der marokkanischen Firma ins Geschäft zu kommen und Angebote

einzuholen, bittet der deutsche Einkaufsleiter Nick Kunze Sie als seinen /seine

Sachbearbelter/-in ein Gespräch mit dem marokkanischen Geschäftsführer Zafer Rhinas

der Firma Albayt zu führen.

Fertigen Sie für Hern Kunze eine Gesprächsnotlz auf Deutsch an.

COSY, Berlin Zafer Rhinas,

zu Ihren Zahlungs- und Lieferbedingungen Marrakech

Erstellen Sie das Angebot für die Leiterin der Vertriebsabtellung, Marion Rickert, unter Hello. My name is ... and | am phoning from Germany. | sent you an enquiry

Berücksichtigung der folgenden Stichpunkte. last Monday

Sorry for interrupting. Could you please spell out your name again? I'm afraid

I didn't get it down correctly.

- Bezugnahme auf schriftliche Anfrage mit Details zum italienischen Projekt

= kurze Vorstellung Ihrer Firma omar wpa Shenae Back to 4 nn of ie purchase manager,

- Designerstellung digital auf Webseite nach Anmeldung möglich (Design, Größe, a nth inl. Ach ata. sche

Farben) I checked your website and saw that you are a fumiture wholesaler

- Entsprechender Kostenvoranschlag auf Webseite We were given the name of your company by a wholesaler in Tunisia. Do you

- Selbstinstallation oder Installationsserwice in ganz Europa mit zusätzüchen Kosten have any other references?

- Zahlung: Vorauszahlung :

r R : We studied your website very carefully and were impressed by your range of

u Zahlungsmethoden Zahlung per Kreditkorts bzw. Zahlung per Sofortüber welsung products. However would it be also possible for you to send us your brochures

- Transport: Paketdienst DHL oder eigener Transport bei großem Umfang and any other advertising materials?

- Lieferzeit: 2- 5 Wochen nach Auftragsbestätigung (abhängig von Standart, Produkt

und Versandart) That would be most kind of you. My other question concerns the terms of

5; for?

- Überprüfung von Produktions- und Versandstotus im internet möglich payment. How wald goods shi be paid tor)

- Garantie: 1 Jahr auf Material, bei Installation durch Technikerteam 2 Johre That's great That's how we usually do business with our other foreign

- Unterliegt AGBs business partners. Can we talk about any possible discounts on your goods’

- Anlage: AGBs, Prospektmaterial That sounds brilliant. We will definitely take this into account. Another point

— Höflicher Schluss I wanted to raise is delivery. As you know, the Christmas season is coming up

and we would like to have your goods by the beginning of September.

Perfect That's all my questions for now. Thank you for all your help.

| certainly will. Thank you very much and goodbye

oO U 22x N DC

sus Zu

--- Seite 16 ---

em ORDERS g

i: bs ~" ~~ / — | 1 Structure of a detailed order

Ordering goods

tbhasicorder In business transactions, an order 5 placed when the conditons of an offer are favourable

to both the buyer and the seller. Many 826 (business to business) transactions are made

online. After registering with the supplier, a company may place orders via the supplier's

website. This method is also widely used in B2C (business to consumer) transactions

Match the different parts of a detalled order to the corresponding sentences (1-17) in the

letter below.

complimentary close salutation request for order confirmation terms of payment

prices and discounts reference to offer appropriate ending terms of delivery and delivery

time description, quantity of articles subject line instructions on packing (transportation,

insurance, delivery)

Order for raincoats [1]

Dear Mrs Martens, 9

Thank you very much for your offer of 14 March 20... [3]

Asthe goods meet with our approval, we would like to place an order for the

following outdoor clothing on the terms stated in your quotation.

Article No. Description Colour/ Pattern Qty Unitprice _ Subtotal 14

R12 raincoat dotted 40 $45.00 $1,800.00

R14 raincoat _neonlight 50 $4500 $2,250.00

ne H1a headband dotted 50 $6.00 $300.00

H12 headband neon light 50 $600 $300.00

a Think: Have you ever ordered anything online? What did you like about online shopping and

Subtotal $4,650.00

where did you come across problerns?

Trade discount 5% $232.50

b Pair: Share your experiences with a partner. Agree on five dos and five don'ts of online Total SATT.

shopping

c Share: Share your results and experiences in class

We appreciate your granting a trade discount of 5 % on the list prices. 15]

As agreed over the phone, we would like each garment to be packed In its own

2 Essential parts of an order reusable cloth bag. It is our mission to supply our customers with sustainable and

A buyer places an order with a seller to receive goods or services. The following three ORE TAREE GOES RAG WE TEES SF POCHARIAE DR: OE Peso Scene. SF

categories should be included in every order. Which Information would you expect in each of Prices are quoted DAP Flensburg warehouse with adelivery time of two weeks after

these three categories? Think of orders sent 10 / from your own company. receipt of order, as you assured us the goods can be delivered ex-stock. The goods

must reach us by 10 April at the latest, and we reserve the right to cancel the order

after that date. We would also ask you to email us the tracking number once the

goods leave your warchouse, [7]

Payment will be made by bank transfer to your account with Palmer Bank within

7 days of receipt of order. is}

Please acknowledge this order in writing and inform us once our goods have been

dispatched. (3]

1. Information about the items being ordered

2. Shipping information

3. Payment information

We look forward to rec eiving these products a5 soon as possible. [#0]

Yours sincerely, bl

oO U L220%Xx NW DC Ka

--- Seite 17 ---
+skiliemall 3

| order

@O@uzkz OW

Types of orders

Match the different types of orders to the correct definition.

orders on call standing orders trialorders repeat orders

1. ... are placed for a small quantity to test the products or service first.

2. ... cover the goods or services ordered previously.

3. ... ensure that identical quantities are supplied at regular intervals.

4. „..‚Le.örders placed for large quantities called for at irregular intervals, play an

important role within the concept of just-in-time delivery.

» Which order would you place in the following situations? Use the terms from exercise a

1. A window supplier has agreed to deliver different-sized windows to a bullding company

working on a skyscraper, The complete order quantity will be bought within 12 months.

2. Auniversity library gets a new Issue of a journal series as soon as it Comes out each month.

3. Afurniture factory had previously ordered ceramic handles for Its kitchens from a supplier.

They would need to order more handles to be able to go on with the production.

4. You work for an advertising company and you need prints on a regular basis, The quality of

different printing companies differs greatly so you should really test their services first.

Placing atrial order

After receiving an unsolicited offer from AB Filter Technology in the UK, Motorenwerke

Böblingen want to place a trial order for filters and cartridges.

Complete the letter below with words and phrases from the box.

Delivery time Description Guarantee period Payment willbemade Terms of delivery

this order is executed to our full satisfaction We have carefully considered your offer

We would ask you tomake sure Payment Price

Dear Ms Heywood,

1 and would now like to place atrial order as follows:

Quantity 2 Specification i

unit —_ high-pressure filter unit type SF 03 GBP 705.00

Tunit refill cartridge unit type 5F 10 GEP 137.00

We would ask you to deliver the items on the terms stated below.

4: approx. | month

&: CXW Birmingham

“: 30 days net

? ; 12 months for the filter unit

# by electronic fund transfer (EFT).

* thatthe articles are packed with the utmost care.

We intend to do further business with you if @.

Best regards,

Mark Eggensperger

Mark Eggensperger

Purchasing Manager Engineering

sskiltemait 4 Placing a standing order

ETEBBcEB

eskillmemo

The online company Speeder GmbH wants their images edited professionally and they

intend to employ the services of the Indian company image Ltd.

Write an email to place a standing order and Include the following notes.

— Dark für die Durchführung des Testouftrags und Zusendung der Arbeitsmuster

-— Auftrag: Hintergrundentfernung; Bildformate jpeg bzw. png

- Preis pro Bild 5 Cent, Video von 30 Sekunden 50 Cent; Annahme des Mengenrabatts

von 5% bei 100 Bildern und 50 Videos wie im Angebot erwähnt

— Frist: Bild- und Videobearbeitung 2 Tage (4.4 Stunden) nach Auftragseingang

— Bezahlung erfolgt durch Banküberweisung bei Wareneingang

— Bitte um Bestätigung dieses Auftrags

— Ansprechportnerin für weitere Fragen: Frau Sorglas, Speeder GmbH

5 Listening: Improving order management systems

Listen to the podcast and answer the questions.

. What are the advantages of a modern order management system?

. When should you dispatch goods to your customer?

. What are two benefits of clearly stating the terms of payment?

. What are the advantages of using tracking numbers?

. What additional costs do you need to be aware of if shipping outside of the EU?

. What do you have to consider when deciding on a shipping company?

| + 2 # u ge = zu WO SZ

6 Changing an order

Norton Singh, ITmanager of a big hotel in Singapore, wants to purchase robots for various

tasks around the hotel from the German company Robo KG in Wiesbaden. Mr Singh has

already been to Wiesbaden to see Cleany, the hotel robot, in action and has received an

offer from Robo KG. However, some changes are necessary before the order can be placed.

Listen to the voicemail from Mr Singh and, in a memo in German, note down any relevant

information for the Robo KG head of sales, Patrick Bott.

eskillletter / Order letters

eek illorder

ihre Vorgesetzte jasmin Kulzer (Kufstadt GmbH, Turmstr. 15, 86750 Augsburg) geht auf das

Angebot der Firma Moreale Cosmetics Inc. (255 Montreal Street, Burlington, VT 05401, USA)

ein und bitter Sie eine Bestellune als Brief zu schreiben. Sie hat Ihnen dazu die folgenden

Punkte aufgeschrieben

— Datum: 24. November 20. ; Ansprechpartner Chris Peters

— Danke für das Angebot vom 20. Nowember 20

— Bestellung: 10 Kisten Moreale TechOne Hoorgel (TO/321), Preis: 271$ pro Kiste

10 Kisten Moreale TechTwo Haargel (TT/327), Preis: 299 $ pro Kiste

- Gesamtsumme: 5,700 $; Einführungsrabatt von S% annehmen

= Mengenrabatt wird noch nicht genützt, do wir zundchst das Produkt auf dem

deutschen Markt testen möchten

— Preis- und Lieferbedingen wie im Angebot akzeptieren

= Zahlung im Voraus bei Erhalt der Auftragsbestätigung; Preise DAP Augsburg

- Bitte um Auftragsbestätigung

-— Bestellung angernessen abschließen

--- Seite 18 ---
phoned all

honecall

oO U 22x N DC

5 Negotiating the terms of an order by phone

Ruhr Sprachschule in Essen has received an offer for custom-designed racing bikes from

the Danish company Bikes For You A/S. Before placing an order, Ruhr Sprachschule wants

to darify some points. Work with a partner and role play the conversation.

Sie melden sich mit threm Namen.

Sie rufen im Namen Ihres Chefs, Herr

#basicorder 9 Filling in a purchase order

Special forms are often used for ordering goods or services. They are called purchase orders

(PO) and must be confirmed by the seller before the order can be executed.

You will find the purchase order from Nova Solar below. After receiving an offer from

Solarspelcher AG, they have decided to order some Solar 5 batteries

Match the different headings of a purchase order form to the corresponding parts (1-14) In

the form below.

Seller (name and business address) Buyer (name and billing address) Order date

Shipping address Purchase order no. Signature (buyer) Delivery date item description

Gärtner, an, Sie möchten den Verkaufs-

manager sprechen, den Sie auf der (SPO

Fahrradmesse in München getroffen haben

Sie möchten wissen, wie die Lieferzeiten

sind

Bitten um schnellstmögliche Lieferung

Sie fragen nach Lieferzeitvon Fahrrädern

mit Aluminiumrahmen

Ihre Firma möchte 20 Fahrräder kaufen

(Katalognummer 321, grau-blau, Aluminium).

Reden Sie nochmals über Liefer-/Zahlungs-

bedingungen. Kommen Sie zu Kompromiss.

EXW nicht akzeptabel, besser CIP Hamburg;

Rabatt 5% anstatt 2%; nicht Bezahlung %

bei Auftrag und “i bei Lieferung, sondem

erst Bezahlung bei Wareneingang

Bitte um schnellstmögliche genaue

Kostenaufstellung

Sie betonen nochmals, dass schnellst-

möglich geliefert werden muss.

Bei guten Geschäftsbedingungen evtl

weitere Bestellungen.

Verabschieden Sie sich

: COMMON MISTAKES

The sales manager is on the phone:

Bo Hansen, Thank for call and previous

email with details of design requirements

and requested logo. Company would like to

do business with the language school

Only limited number of bicycles in stock

Delivery times depend on volume of order,

Currently facing delivery problems with

carbon bicycles.

Usual delivery time for aluminium bicycles

2 months. You want to know the number of

bikes to be ordered

You will try to speed up delivery

CIP Hamburg is fine, as is accepting full

payment once the bikes are delivered.

You can only accept a 3% discount.

Promise to send all necessary information

(price, packaging, shipping) by ..

Stress you willdo your best to speed up

delivery. Say goodbye.

tem number Price perunit Shipping method Terms of payment discount Warranty period

Nova Solar

Solarspeicher AG

Spitalstr 15

18057 Rostock

Germany

Seller - person in charge: Mark Fuchs

Buyer - person in charge: Alba Gomez

Nova Solar

Calle Marla 25

2903 Malaga

Spain

é r Qty

Solar 5 solar battery 400

Solar 5 solar battery 300

Other comments or special instructions:

Terms of delivery: ex works (Rostock)

w: 3 weeks after receipt of order

#: 10 days net

@ : by road

Purchase Order (PO)

(Pieuse sate fhe name on all correspondence mci

rene EP he order)

Bank details

Deutsche Bank

IBAN ...

BIC ...

9 23 October 20..

Nova Solar /Mova Sol 5.A.

Calle Marla 25

29013 Mälaga

Spain

Colour 4 Total in €

white € 2500 1,000,000.00

black €2,500 750,000.00

Subtotal 1,750,000.00

Quantity 5%  +-87500.00

Introductory discount 10%

Other -_

Total 1,487,500,00

1. You have supplied-us supplied / supplied us with printers.

2. We have received your offer fran of 6 May.

3. We would like to place an order of for handbags.

4. Prices are taken from your actual current price list.

5. We would like to make do further business with you.

Further information: Packing in wooden crates on pallets

#: 24 months after receipt of goods

Standard terms of payment and sale apply.

Date: 23 October M. @ Alba Gomez

--- Seite 19 ---
4 WORKSHOP B ORDERS

Order confirmation and cancellation

@hasiconder Confirming an order reduces und ertainty and 5 a service that lets the customer know that

ns / her order has been received and 5 beine dealt with

Orders can be cancelied by either the buyer or the Seiler. Reasons tor cancelling an order

can vary from one of the parties being at fault to any other unexpected armstances

1 Structure of a detailed order confirmation

[al] The German company, Solarspelcher AG, has received the order from Nova Solar in Spain.

They are now sending an order confirmation by email.

Match the different parts of a detailed order confirmation to the comesponding sentences

(1-8) in the letter below.

acknowledgement of order repeating details (quantity and name of product, price and

discounts, terms of payment and delivery) further information subject line salutation

goodwill ending reference to order complimentary close information concerning delivery

From: Mark Fuchs

To Alba Gomer

Date: 26 October 20.

Subject: Onder for Solar 5 batteries Order No. 5B 345 [1]

Attachment: pro-forma invoice

Dear Ms Gomez, [2]

We were delighted to receive your order (no. 58 345) which we would like to confirm as

follows: [3]

Solar 5 batteries: 400 units in white and 300 units in black [4]

Unit price € 2,500

- Discounts: 5% quantity discount and 10% introductory discount

Total: €1,487,500

Delvery: 3 weeks after receipt of order, ex works (Rostock)

- Payment: 10 days net

We have already contached our forwarders regarding the transport of the goods. Each solar

battery will be packaged in a single cardboard box. The boxes will be packed In wooden crates

and stacked on pallets, with 20 crates per pallet. (5)

AS agreed, delivery will be paid for by Nova Solar, i.e. road transport by lorry 5 to be covered by

Nove Solar at its Own expense. We will send you an email when your order has been shipped. [a]

Please find attached the pro forma invoice which includes all the necessary details of your order.

Alongside the consignment you will receive the packing list, the consignment note and the

Certificate of Origin Sssued by the Chamber of Commerce, Augsbure

Please do not hesitate to contact us Ifyou have any further questions or comments. [7]

Yours sinderely [®

Mark Fuchs

oO U 22x N DC

2 Confirming an order by phone

Rahul Khan, sales manager at Guptha Rubber PLC has received an order from Ruth Bennet

from The Bike Factory in Leipzig. He calls her to clarify some questions and confirm the order.

Ms Bennet asks you to summarise the dialogue for her colleague in the purchasing

department in amemo in German.

Ruth Bennet R. Khan

Good morning. The Bike Factory Europe. This is Ruth Bennet speaking.

It’s very kind of you to phone me personally. As you know, we are very interested in

the offer you sent us for your hard-wearing tyres. They are just right for our new

& bike, the Solar Racer.

Perfect! In our order we quoted DDP Leipzig. | just wanted to check that this is

convenient for you as you stated FCA in your offer?

And can you deliver in time?

How much would that cost?

Perfect. | would really appreciate that. | reckon Il be able to send you the order

by the end of this week. Thank you, Mr Khan. It was a pleasure talking to you

Read the email and complete it using the phrases from the box.

sskillemail 3 Cancelling an order

Nature Ltd. has to cancel a substantial order for homeopathic painkillers.

my sincere apologies confirm cancellation at very short notice any inconvenience

We are terribly sorry cancel our order We assure you

From: Signe Scholz A

To: james Bordon

Date: 12 March 20

Sublet: Cancellätion of order for homeopathic painkillers

Dear Mir Bordon,

4 to inform you that we have no altemative but to GE for homeopathic painkillers whith we

ordered on 8 March 20.

Unfortunately, our main customer for this type of medicine has gone bankrupt and therefore

canceled al hs orders 3

We would be grapeful if you could A of this order by email

5 that we fully intend to do further business with your company In the future.

Please accept WE) for IM this may cause,

Yours sincerely,

Slane Scholz ¥

--- Seite 20 ---
BUSINESS SCENARIO

=“. iia

Step 1

“skill

phonecall

phonecall

@ok illorder

kl Whe ther

@O@uzkz OW

Business scenario

AEP ist ein führender Hersteller von Hörgeräten in Deutschland und produziert Hörgeräte

tür unterschliedlichste ndmaduelle Bedurnsse. Die Filta mochte nun mit 3 Druckern

einzelne leile eines Hörperätes herstellen, ist aber noch nicht Sicher, OD Sie diese Teile vor

Ort selbst produzieren oder die Arbeit outsourcen werden, Daher möchte AEP einen

3D-Drucker als Testperat bestellen. Als Praktikarit/-in in der Geschaftsführung wurden Sie

beauftragt, diese Angelegenheit zu übernehmen

im Namen ihres Firmenchefs Peter Wagner

führen Sie mit der US-amerikanischen Arma

Sono Inc Sarasota, Florida, die unter anderem

3D-Drucker herstellt (Verkaufsleiterin Europa:

janice Stevens) ein Gespräch bezüglich einer

möglichen Bestellung von 3D-Druckern.

Führen Sie das Gespräch mit einem Partner /

einer Partnerin. — Role card B, p. 118

Role Card A - AEP Deutschland

« Rufen Sie für die deutsche Firma bei der US-Firma an.

« Fragen Sie nach der zuständigen Person für den Verkauf von 30-Druckem.

Stellen Sie Ihre Firma, Ihre Produkte und Ihr Vorhaben kurz vor.

Ein Geschäftspartner hat Sie auf die US-Firma aufmerksam gemacht, informationen über die

3D-Drucker haben Sie sich im Internet besorgt

Fragen Sie nach den Kosten für einen 3D-Drucker, der für diese Aufgabe geeignet ist.

Fragen Sie, ob eine Testlieferung möglich wäre.

Nehmen Sie den Vorschlag die Bedienungseinweisung via Videokonferenz abzuhalten an.

Kündigen Sie die Bestellung von 20 3D-Druckern an, falls das Gerät den Erwartungen

entspricht.

Kündigen Sie die schriftliche Bestellung des Testgeräts an.

Verabschieden Sie sich angemessen

Nach der erfolgreichen Testung des 3D-Druckers, hat AEP ein Angebot von der Firma Sono

Inc. erhalten. ihr Vorgesetzter Peter Wagner entscheidet sich für den Kauf von 20 3D-Druckern.

Formulieren Sie den Auftrag in einem Brief und gehen Sie auf die folgenden Punkte ein.

— Bank für Testgerdt, hat sehr gut funktioniert, ebenso die Einweisung per

Videokonferenz

- Bestellung von 20 Stück der 3D-Drucker, Typ SDP60X

— Bedingungen wie in Angebot erwähnt: Preis: 6,500 $, Bezahlung 10 Tage nach Erhalt

der Rechnung bei Little Rock Bank, Sorasota, FL, Rabattoption: Mengenrabatt 5%

- Lieferbedingungen: DAP München, Lieferung 3 Wochen nach Auftragseingang

- ein Johr Garantie (kostenlose Lieferung von Ersatzteilen in dieser Zeit),

Servicevertrag zwei Jahre gültig

- Lieferung von Bedienungsanleitungen für Geräte und entsprechender Software

-— Bestellung von Druckermaterial erfolgt regelmäßig über PO

BBEBEBBBE

Review

Before you test yourself in Exam practice, take a few moments to reflect on what you

have just learned. Then make a follow-up plan: What do you need to improve before the

final exam? How will you Fo about petting there? You can check again after Exam proctice

sbaslcorder In this unit, you have learned how to ...

place orders by email or letter | talk about an order and negotiate it by telephone | get relevant

information from a telephone call | fill in a purchase order | include different aspects of an

order | write an order confirmation | cancel an order by email

1 Considering these topics and tasks, ask yourself:

‚order Vocabulary Do I know the relevant words and phrases needed to ...

place an order by email or letter | discuss an order on the telephone | fillin a

purchase order | include discounts, terms of payment and delivery, delivery

times etc. in an order | confirm and cancel an order?

Can | understand and use these relevant words and phrases confidently in

speaking and in writing?

Can | adapt my language to the medium / channel | use (letter, email, phone)?

igramtenses Grammar When writing and/or speaking, did I come across a common source of

#gram grammar mistakes?

prepositions If so, what was it and how can | practise and improve in this particular area?

sskillorder Writing Do I know the structure of an order?

ee What do | need to consider when writing an order?

eskillletter

askiliemalt What do | need to consider when writing a memo in German!

What are common mistakes when writing orders?

#5 kil Speaking Can | talk about the different aspects of an order on the phone?

phonecall Can | solve problerns?

Methods / Can | follow instructions on how to do something online?

Strategies

2 Use your answers from 1 to create a learning and revision plan.

WHAT! HUW? WHEN!

What do | need to work on? What will I do to improve? When do | want to complete

this?

--- Seite 21 ---
EXAM PRACTICE ORDERS

~~, fio

@O@uzkz OW

Exam practice

Vermerk über einen Geschäftsbrief (Bearbeitungszeit 30 Minuten)

Sie arbeiten im Spielzeuewarenhaus Zimmermann in Neuhaus in der Einkaufsabtellung.

Am 22. juli hatte das Warenhaus einen Auftrag an die polnische Firma Natural Toys in

Krakow, ul, Mogilska 22, erteilt, worauf die polnische Firma eine Auftragsbestätigung

gesendet hat.

Fassen Sle für den Warenhausleiter, Herm Zimmermann, den inhalt dieses Briefes In einem

Vermerk in deutscher Sprache zusammen (vollständige Sätze, keine Übersetzung).

Dear Mr Zimmermann,

Weare sending you this letter to acknow ledge your order of 22 July. We are y ery

pleased that you have placed this order with our company

As arranged, further repeat orders can be submitted as purchase orders.

Description Colour ModelNo. Quantity Unit price Total

Wooden car red 456 20 1100€E 240.00€

Dog pulltoy brown 775 4d 100€ = 440.00€

Shipping charges 43.00 €

Total price 730€

The whole consignment will be packed and labelled for shipment according to our

usual guidelines. Delivery by post will be executed by 15 August at the latest. The

consignment will be dispatched to the address above and we will send you an email

once it has been dispatched.

Payment must be made by bank transfer upon receipt of the goods. Please find the

bank account details at the end of this letter. Prices are quoted DAP Neuhaus.

We are confident that the products delivered will conform to the specifications

mentioned in your order. In case of any damage, replacements will be sent within

two weeks

This order is subject to our General Terms and Conditions

Please do not hesitate to contact us if you have any questions regarding this order or

our wide range of wooden loys, We are confident that our products will fully meet

youréexpectations

Yours sincerely,

Pawel Woyzak

- 2 Vermerk über ein Telefongespräch (Bearbeitungszeit 20 Minuten)

Das Autohaus Lizzy hat in den USA einen Oldtimer bestellt. Sie nehmen die telefonische

Auftraesbestätleung entgegen und sprechen mit Mary Fast von der Firma Vintage Oldies.

Verfolgen Sie das Telefongesprach und fertigen Sie anschließend für Ihren Firmenchef,

Herrn Gerber eine Gesprachsnotiz auf Deutsch an. Halten Sle die wesentlichen Informationen

zur Lieferung und Bezahlung fest.

Autohaus Lizzy Mary Fast

Autohaus Lizzy, Olga Meine. Guten Tag.

Hello Ms Fast. | hope there is nothing wrong with my order.

That's very kind of you. When you pay 15,000 dollars for a car, you definitely don't

want anything to go wrong!

Yes, I'm aware of that, thanks. | would like the car to be shipped to Bremerhaven,

please.

Fingers crossed nothing happens then!

ll ask my boss about it right away. In my order | asked you to provide all the

necessary documentation for importing the car.

Do you know when | can expect the car here in Germany? As you already know,

I would like the car to be dispatched upon receipt of order.

Is the shipping cost the same as was previously stated!

OK That's a deal then. Please send all these details in your order confirmation

I will do. Thanks very much again. Good bye.

--- Seite 22 ---
u aie

Trade and customs duties

#basiccustoms When selling or buying goods and services it is important to consider possible regulations

and restrictions. Domestic trade and trade within the EU Single Market are more straight

=] DE LIVE RY a ’ I A ; a ~ “, onward than trading on word markets. When biyinge poods from outside the EU you

effectively become an importer and are liable to pay customs, excise duties and VAT

Uniess the terms of sale provide otherwise, foods are held by customs authorities upon

entry until all duties and taxes are paid

1 Trade outside the EU

What should a company consider when exporting to non-EU countries? Complete the list

using the words from the box. There are two more words than you need,

charges complies costly deadlines focus impact manuals native procedures research

What to consider in international trade:

- For smaller companies it is probably a good idea to @ on a small number of export

markets.

- It is Important todo some @ on the market you plan to target.

- Find out whether your product with local technical standards. Any modification to your

product may involve considerable costs.

- Are there any cultural or religious differences that need to be taken into account?

- Sales literature, advertising materials, instructions and | need to be translated into

the local language. Ensure that the translation is of good quality and checked by

a 5 speaker!

- How do you plan to organise transport and deal with documentation? Will you use a

1 Types of transport freight forwarder?

a Discuss with a partner how the following Items can best be transported, Give reasons. - What method of payment will you use?

- Large companies will have dedicated export departments. in smaller companies It is

luxury cars from Cologne to Dubai urgently needed medical products from Frankfurt to essential to have staff with experience of export (@, including familiarity with export

Buenos Aires construction timber from Costa Rica to Antwerp steel tubes from Duisburg to

ER teak Marden es tunel documentation and methods of payment.

- It is essential that documents are completed with the utmost accuracy. Mistakes can cause

long delays and be very m.

- Keeping to “© and delivery dates and controlling quality are even more important In

highly competitive export markets than inthe domestic market.

ch) b Copy the grid. Listen to the interview with Malcolm Gledhill of Globalfreleht and complete

the erid

2 Costs for importing goods

Match the expressions with their correct definition,

charges customs duties excise duties VAT (value added tax) tanes

Advantages 1. a certain amount of money paid on goods that are imported

sd 2. a tax on certain goods such as alcohol or petrol raised by a state

Disadvantages | ... 3. a tax that Is paid by each person when buying goods or services

Typical cargoes 4, money pald to the state based on one’s income

5. amount of money to be paid for something, for example an activity or service

@OvzeZe2PuW 00C ae

--- Seite 23 ---

#basiceustoms 3 Customs authorities Packing and labelling

a Brainstorm with a partner What do customs authorities do? #basic packing Suppliers and freight forwaniers are responsible for ensunne that goods are adequately

b Complete the text with the words from the box. Then check your answers from exercise a.

packed to protect them from i

amage, humidity, heat, thet etc $0 that they arrive in

perfect condition

branded cheaply competitors copies domestic duties levied logo movement

prices products protect 1 Are you familiar with these words? Match the English terms with their German equivalents.

Look up words you do not know, If necessary

Customs authorities 1 barrel | 2 biodegradable | 3 blister A wattierter Umschlag | B Mehrweebehalter |

The customs authorities most important tasks packaging | 4 bubble wrap | 5 corrugated C Polstermaterial | D Fass | E Stahibandum-

are tolevy customs andtax 1 and to monitor the cardboard | 6 coll | 7 crate | 8 cushioning reifune | F Tonne | G Styropor-Chips | IH Luft-

cross-border 2 of poods. So, if goods can be material | 9 desiccant | 10 drum | 11 foam polsterfolle | 1 Kanister | | Lattenkiste |

s produced more # abroad than in Germany for rubber | 12 jar | 13 jerry can | 14 jiffy bag | K Dehnfolle | L Glas | M Schrumpfverpackune |

example,customs dutyis 4 on certain goods. 15 polystyrene chips | 16 reusable con- N Trocknungsmittel | O Rolle | P Schaum

This isdone to align § andprotect # producers tainers | 17 steel strapping | 18 shrink stoff | Q biologisch abbaubar | R Holzkiste |

who, for various reasons, cannot produce as wrapping | 19 stretch wrap | 20 wooden 5 Blister-Verpackung | T Wellpappe

cheaply as some oftheir 7 . box

» Customs authorities also # copyrights. Companies inother countriesoftencopy #

goods and want to sell these # in Germany. These products are marked with the of

the copied brand, although they are made from inferior materials. That is why customs

controls also look for counterfeit 2.

c Discuss: What does Brexit mean for the importation of goods?

»basicdelivery 4 just-in-time deliveries

Read the text and note down the advantages of justintime delivery. Can you think

of disadvantages and problems of just-in-time deliveries? Discuss in class.

In logistics, adelivery is called just-in-time

if it arrives at the customer exactly when it

is needed. In principle, just-in-time

deliveries offer the advantage that you do

| § not need to find away to store goods before

production. The goods can be delivered

2 Containerisation

Research how the invention of standardised shipping containers contributed to globalisation

directly from the lorry to the production Share your results in class.

site and can then be used immediately,

i . r = oer m

/ This process significantly improves 5 Shipping and handling marks

71 efficiency in manufacturing while offering Match the instructions with the handling marks.

} numerous opportunities for cost savings.

d This, however, requires a sophisticated

transport control system as well as a high- 1. sling here

n performing and reliable IT system so that 2, centre of gravity

15 all parties involved are always kept up to 3. use no hooks

date on important processes, 4. top

5, fragile, handle with care

6, keep away from heat

7, keep dry

8, flammable

9, radioactive

OULLONDC =

--- Seite 24 ---
Incoterms

| “basic Shipping goods requires planning and coordination between the seller and the buyer

into terms

There are questions that need to be darified before shipping like: Who will arrange the

transport! Who Will pay for carrıape? Who Will bear the risk of loss or damage to the

goods in transit!

Buyers and sellers can use the Incoterms to ensure a trouble-free export transaction and

AVOId POssiMe COST MSBtaKeS. Incoterms can be applied both IN domestic and in inter

national transactions. They are also widely used for trade within the EU

1 Knowing the Incoterms

The International Commercial Terms, or Inooterms for short, are a registered trademark of the

International Chamber of Commerce (ICC). They are recognised worldwide and are of great

Importance In Intemaätional trade. The Incoterms regulate the riehts and obligations of

buyers and sellers concerning the costs of transporting goods, the transfer of risk, shipping

Insurance, loading and unloading, transport documents, customs duties etc.

Incoterms 2020

Rules for any mode © EXW Ex Works(... named place of delivery)

or modes of FCA Free Carrier (... named place of delivery)

transport CPT (Carriage Paid To (... named place of destination)

OP (Carriage and Insurance Paid to (... named place of destination)

DAP Delivered At Place (... named place of destination)

DPU Delwered at Place Unloaded (... named place of destination)

DOP Delivered Duty Paid (... named place of destination)

Rules for sea and FAS Free Alongside Ship (... named port of shipment)

inland waterway FOB Free On Board (... named port of shipment)

transport CFR Cost and Freight(... named port of destination)

CF = Cost, Insurance and Freight (... named port of destination)

a Study the table above and look at the chart on page 127. Then match the Incoterms In

the table below (1-17) with their appropriate information (A- K).

Rules for any mode or modes of transport

Inco- Designation Seller's obligations Passing of risk from

term seller to buyer

EXW Ex Works place the goods at the disposal of the

Ab Werk buyer at the named place (seller's 1

premises, factory, warehouse etc.)

when the goods are

handed over to the

carner

FCA Free Carrier

Frei Frachtführer 2

CPT Carriage Paid to deliver the goods to the carrier and

Frachtfrei pay the cost of carriage to the named 3

place of destination

CIP Carriage and when the goods are

Insurance Paid to 4 handed over to the

Frachtfrei versichert carrier

oO U 22x N DC

DAP Delivered at Place

Geliefert benannter

DPU Delivered at Place

Unloaded

Geliefert benannter

Ort entladen

DOP = Delivered Duty Paid

Geliefert verzollt

Inco- Designation

term

FAS | Free alongside Ship

Frei Langsseite Schiff

FOB Free on Board

Frei an Bord

CFR = Cost and Freight

Kosten und Fracht

CIF | Cost, Insurance

and Freight

Kosten, Versicherung

und Fracht

at the named place

(seller's premises etc.)

deliver the goods on board

the ship named by the

buyer at the named port

of shipment

deliver the goods to the

carrier named by the buyer

(road, rail or air carrier)

when the goods are on

board the ship in the port

of shipment

Place the goods at the buyer's

disposal, ready for unloading, at the

named place of destination

place the goods at the buyer's disposal,

ready for unloading, at the named

place of destination, carry out all

customs formalities and pay import

duty, if any

Rules for sea and inland waterway transport

Seller's obligations

deliver the goods alongside the ship

named by the buyer at the named port

of shipment

deliver the goods on board the ship

and pay the costs and freight to the

named port of destination

E when the goods are

| When the goods

have been unloaded

atthe place of

destination

Passing of risk from |

seller to buyer

when the goods are |

on board the ship in

the port of shipment

when the goods are |

on board the ship in

the port of shipment

H atthe place of destination

handed overto the carner I whenthe goods are

F place the goods at the

alongside the ship in the

buyer's disposal, unloaded, port of shipment

at the named place of | atthe place of destination

destination K deliver the goods on board

G deliver the goods to the the ship; pay the costs and

carrier, pay the cost of freight to the named port

carnage and take out of destination and take

insurance to the named out insurance for the

place of destination transport

b Compare and discuss your results with a partner.

--- Seite 25 ---

gg Does

©) c Look at the following business transactions and match them with the appropriate Incoterm. Dispatch advice and shipping documents

1. Games & Adventure Inc. arranges and pays for the transportation and loading “basic International trade relies on accurate documentation that meets the regulations of the

of a consignment of tabletop games on board a cargo plane at San Francisco shippingdocs respective countries. Therefore, the documentation process of international shipping is

airport. Games & Adventure Inc. sells @ San Francisco. an essential part of logistics. To ensure that your products get to their destination without

2. Davidson plc is a manufacturer with a very powerful position in the market. any problems, it is important to complete the paperwork properly

As It refuses to bear transportation risks, distributors have to collect goods

from the factory. Davidson plc sells m. 1 Structure of a detailed dispatch advice

3. Cumbria Steel pic has agreed to pay the costs of transport by mad - including a As soon a5 preparations for the transport of goods are completed, the customer Is

Insurance - for a consignment of steel plates from its mill to Magdeburg, the informed of the impending dispatch. Sometimes the dispatch advice forms part of the

place of delivery named by the buyer The terms of delivery are # order confirmation. Match the different parts of a dispatch advice to the correct numbers.

4. Maschinenbau Brandenburg GmbH imports parts from Taiwan. The Taiwanese ph re äh manager . '

manufacturer pays for transportation to the port of Keelung, loading charges, COUTEOUS Piss PaCKing Coteus rence toorder transport information persona

and freight merk ie mh en he port of pa ds nd i salutation information that the goods are ready for collection or have been dispatched

Germany. Their terms are & complimentary close reference to payment reference to documents

5. Silicon Fen Electronics imports components from japan. The japanese manu-

facturer pays for transportation to Yokohama, the por of shipment, and pays

the loading costs. Silicon Fen Electronics has to pay for freight, insurance and

all other costs from Yokohama to Cambridge. The japanese supplier sells 5°. re ‘

6. When Palm Top Ltd orders notebooks from India, the Indian manufacturer Dear Nicolas, (2)

bears all risks and costs, including UK customs duty until the note books We are pleased to inform you that your cutlery has been shipped today as air freight. [9]

have been delivered to Palm Top's premises in Rawdon, Yorkshire. Their terms it will be transported on Air Quebec fight no. AQ704, which leaves Munich Airport on 3 May at

are @. 21:15 and arrives. at Montreal Airport at 23:50 local time. [4) The cutlery is packed in 1 ULD

7. Ergo Büromöbel regularly supplies office fumiture to Svensk Kontor AB, a sarin NE a ganic nae Mr a saddles rain eek

Swedish wholesaler. The furniture is transported at Ergo Büromöbel's risk and 1 DIR conmencial Inwolce, packing ist, Iaurance Certificate) accompany the goods. 1

expense by lorry to Svensk Kontor's warehouse in Stockholm, the place of We hope your onder will arrive punctually and we look forward to doing business with you again

destination named by the buyer. The furniture is then ready to be unloaded soon. HM}

from the lorry at Svensk Kontors convenience. Ergo Büromöbel delivers to Best wishes, [3

Svensk Kontor AB on the terms = warehouse in Stockholm. v

ve EEE WER. b Study the following dispatch advice and decide which ofthe alternatives Is correct.

Research the following topics and report back

‘gram

in class: relative ctauses

- Deliveries by drones: How will logistics Subject: Your purchase (order no. 1870) (1 effirem 1 May 20. 2 sbeut/ter 500 jars of Caviar A

networks change?

- Increasing e-commerce: What changes has a ee es

it triggered In terms of deliveries? What This & to inform you that your jars are now ready to be dispatched Triple this

are the respective advantapes and moming’s purchase order. Each jar has been wrapped in tissue paper before being packaged into

disadvantages? ieee own decorative cardboard box. These boxes are packed into heavy-duty containers,

20 v0 a container, "TE Wehe are then loaded into two wooden cases with ample

Cushioning material As requested the cases OS had/hmebeen | marked with both the net and

gross weights, the order number and your address. The consignment will be delivered CPT Rome,

T. sk) stated in your order

Your goods willbe put aufs) Acht Alitalia 736 kaving Munich at 10 am on 30 November

20..and arriving in Rome at 11.30 am. Please find attached a copy of the air waybill and copies of

the invoice. We 9. wll eeuid ask you to pay within 14 days of receipt of the caviar

We trust thatthe caviar will reach you in good condition and we look forward to the pleasure of

10. deing/making | business with you again soon

Yours sincerely,

Dagmar Miller

Head of Exports v

oO U 22x N DC

--- Seite 26 ---
a, i i |

Business scenario

=| EN un : PROGR CONMENON shipping documents Sie absolvieren ein Praktikum in der Einkaufsabteilune der Baumaschinen KG, einem

a Match the different shipping documents with their German translation.

Hersteller von Baumaschinen in Hamburg. Ihr Unternenmen hat vor tin Tagen eine

1 Bill of Lading (B/) A Packliste Bestellung über Ersatzteile bei der Arma Bramford Ltd. in Newcastle aufgepeben. Die

2 Waybill B Handelsrechnung Ersatzteile sind für Ihren Kunden Kuma Mining Germany GmbH bestimmt, der diese

3 Air Waybill C Zollinhaltserklärung Ersatzteile dnngend benötigt

4 Certificate of Origin D Konnossement

5 Packing List E Frachtbrief

6 Commerdal invoice F Versicherungspolice

7 Insurance Policy G Ursprungszeuenis

8 Customs Declaration H Luftfrachtbrief

b Work with a partner. Do some Internet research and come up with a short description for

each shipping document

eskilidelwery 3 Writing a dispatch advice

Sie arbeiten im Bereich Export Logistik im Hauptlager Duisburg von The Bike Factory

iia Europe GmbH (Warehouse and Distribution, Hafenstr. 33-39, 47119 Duisburg,

warehouse@the-bike-factory...de). Die australische Arma Cycling Sports (125 Kangaroo

Road, Melbourne, Victoria 5039/ Australien) hatte 200 Mountainbikes der Marke BX 421 zum

Einkaufsprels von €850 bestellt. Gesamtpreis: € 170.000, Lieferbedingung: CIF Melbourne. tee Bramford Lid. hat eine Nachricht in Bezug auf die Bestellung der Ersatztelle auf Ihrer Mail-

Heute ist der 12. August 20.. und die Ware ist versendet worden. 7 box hinterlassen. Hören Sie die Nachricht an und fassen Sie den Inhalt für Ihren Vorgesetz-

ch) ssi ten, Stephan Bistram, auf Deutsch zusammen.

Schicken Sie per E-Mail eine Versandanzelge mit heutigem Datum an die australische Firma.

ihre Kontaktperson ist james Head (j.headg@pcycling_sports...corm). Berücksichtigen Sie dabei

die folgenden Punkte: Kite Eine Stunde später erhalten Sie die folgende E-Mail von Stephan.

- 200 Fahrräder am 10. August an Bord der YM Unity 12 von Hamburg Hafen abgegangen Hallo, A

- Versendung in 10 seefesten Containern

- voraussichtliche Ankunft in Melbourne 2. September 20. bin gleich in einer Sitzung, Bitte rufe Herm Kumar an (aus Indien, neu bei Kuma Mining Germany

GmbH, spricht kein Deutsch) und erkläre ihm, warum wir die Ersatzteile später bekommen und

- Versonddokumente: Originale Konnossement-Nr. TFEO? 5823 3/001 3-foch, sich deswegen der versand seiner Bestellung auch um 2 Tage verzögern wird. Die Verzögerung ist

Handelsfoktura 3-foch, Originale Ursprungszeugnis 2-fach und eine Kopie, Originale ein Fall von höherer Gewalt

Versicherungspolice 2-foch mit einer Kopie Frage ihn bitte bei der Gelegenheit, ob er sich einmal unsere Produktion hier in Hamburg

- Ongemessener Schluss ansehen möchte und welche Termine in Frage kämen

Schreibe mir bitte ein kurzes Memo über das Gespräch - gerne auch auf Englisch

T COMMON MISTAKES nn Danke

lp i a are : maskin +

1. Transport wR by lorry ..

2. We Uke would like to charter a ship for the transport of ...

3. We wish to conclude take out Insurance for ...

4. Please contact the surance insurance company

5. Please let us know to on what terms you can insure a cargo of ...

6. The goods will be sent with by courier, . an ec

7. The lorry left our premises to for Paris last nieht. BER STERNEN a eee SERIE RAR RU EBD,

8. The consignment will arrive by at your warehouse at on 14 june,

9. The documents will be released to you from by your bank.

10. We hope the goods will arrive punctual punctually. | El

Step Pim Sie rufen Herm Kumari von Kuma Mining Germany an, Führen Sie das Gespräch mit einem

Partner/einer Partnerin. Berücksichtigen Sie die Angaben aus Stephans E-Mail.

+ Role cards, p. 119

eskilimemea

oO U L220%Xx NW DC Kur

--- Seite 27 ---
DELIVERY

Review

Before you test yourself in Exom practice, take a few moments to reflect on what you

have just learned. Then make a follow-up plan: What do you need to improve before the

final kam! How Will you go about getting there! You GAN CHECK apa after Exam practice

ebasicpacking In this unit, you have learned ...

1 Considering these topics and tasks, ask yourself:

AAAI

delivery Vocabulary Do I know the relevant words and phrases relating to .

the different modes of transport | packing and labelling | the Incoterms |

the most common shipping documents?

Can | understand and use these relevant words and phrases confidently in

speaking and writing?

Can | adapt my language to the medium / channel | use (letter, email, phone)?

‘gram Grammar When writing and/or speaking, did | come across a common source of

Prepositions grammar mistakes?

‘gram

relativeclauses If so, what was it and how can | practise and improve in this particular area?

sskilimeme Writing Do | know the structure of a dispatch advice?

eckilidellvery What do I need to consider when writing a dispatch advice?

What do I need to consider when writing a memo in German?

What mistakes are commonly made in correspondence regarding delwenes!

skill

phonecall Speaking Can | make a phone call and inform the customer about a delay in delivery?

phonecall Methods / Do | know how to spell correctly, and can I take down names and numbers

Strategies accurately?

AOS OE

2 Use your answers from 7 to create a learning and revision plan:

WHAT? HOW? WHEN?

Whatdo | need to work on? What will | do to improve? When do | want to complete

this?

Ways to improve your vocabulary

- Get into the habit of reading regularly.

- Leam words in context

- Practise using new words in conversation.

oO U 22x N DC

abasic what you have to consider when sending goods to customers concerning regulations and costs

into terms in international trade, packing and labelling, as well a5 shipping documents | how to use the

#basic Incoterms | how to write a dispatch advice

shippingdocs

Exam practice

1 Sprachergänzungstest (Bearbeitungszeit ca, 10 Minuten)

Setzen Sie 20 der 23 angegebenen Wörter in die Lücken des Textes ein.

agreed approximately bill box confirm consignment courier due duplicate

expected forwarding hope loaded marking near placing premise reach shipping

time transported under watertight

Dear Mir Walter, A

Dispatch advice

With reference 00 yesterday's phone call and your emall from 15 September, we are pleased to

% thatthe 2 of oomputer monitor F the order no. UK-1301 has now been 48 on board

MY Gloria, whichis & to leave Bremerhaven for the port of Hull in4 days’ @

The articles have been packed in 4 | containers with the IB) DE-1301 and willbe & from Hull

to York by our I agency Speedup GmbH. Yourorder is Ti 10 aTWe ai your TH in Ww seven

days

in the meantime, the 74 documents (clean 8 of lading, commercial invoice and “inspection

certificates) have been sent to you by post 4 and payment has been received as W

Thank you for your order with our company, We look forward to doing further business with

youlnthe 38 future

Best regards,

Tony Screen ¥

2 Geschaftsbrief nach Stichworten (Bearbeitungszeit 45 Minuten)

Sie arbeiten im Bereich Export Logistik im Hauptlazer Dulsburg von The Bike Factory Europe

GmbH, Warehouse and Distribution, Hafenstr. 33 - 39, 47119 Duisburg (warehouse@

thebikefactory...de). Die französische Firma Bécanes Sports, 33 Rue Saint-Remi, 33000

Bordeaux, hatte 120 hochwertige Gravel Bikes, Typ Fastroad bestellt.

Die Ware ist nun versandbereit.

Schicken Sie per E-Mail eine Versandanzeige mit heutigem Datum an die französische Arma

Ihre Kontaktperson Ist Louls Marchand (Lmarchand@becanessports...com). Berücksichtigen

Sle folgende Punkte:

- Bezugnahme auf obigen Auftrag, Nr. GR 47 11

- Nicht 20 Kisten mit je 6 Bikes, sondern aus Sicherheitsgründen 24 Kisten mit je 5 Bikes

- 120 Grovel Bikes gehen Mittwoch per LKW mit der Spedition Globerunner GmbH noch

Bordeaux ab

- Kisten sind mit Kundenanschrift und Auftragsnummer von Becones Sports markiert

- Voroussichtliche Ankunft in Bordeaux Ende der Woche

- Fahrer wird sich im Lager des Kunden melden

- Bitte um kurze Bestätigung der Ankunft der Ware

- Bitte um pünktliche Überweisung des Rechnungsbetrages

- Angemessener Schluss

--- Seite 28 ---
| basic

PETE

Payment

Fa KI INO €

1 Invoice and pro forma invoice

Read the two short definitions and complete the text by filling in the words /nvoice or pro

forma Inveice (also proforma, pro-forma)

An = Is required whenever an individual or a business sells goods or provides services to a

client or customer. The 2 Is drawn up by the seller and Is evidence of the existence of a

contract to provide goods or services.

A ® Ssnotatne # lt Smply details the commitment of a seller to provide certain goods

or services to a buyer and Is sent before the actual transaction takes place. In intemational

trade, a & may be required for customs or to apply for an import licence in countries where

this 5 required. A Wi contains all the details of the subsequent commercial m.

2 Elements of an invoice

Which items/elements do you think should be Included in an invoice? Discuss in class.

oO U 22x NW DC

u aie

1 Sending a pro forma invoice

The Indian wholesaler Patel Office Equipment ordered office chairs from the German

manufacturer Ereo Bümmöbel GmbH and has asked for a pro forma invoice

Study this pro forma Involce and say which information Is missing. You can find the Items

that should be included in an invoice in the box

date and number of the invoice name and address of the seller name and address of the

customer or client date and numberof the order date when the goods or services are

provided exact details of the goods or services unit price and price for the quantity supplied

details of possible discounts total amount of invoice terms of payment and credit period

granted seller's international bank account number (IBAN) and the bank identifier code (BIC)

or SWIFT the seller's VAT registration number where applicable terms of delivery mode of

transport netweight and gross weight detailsof packaging transport costs

Buromöbel x |

To: Patel Office Equipment GmbH a,

127 Delhi Road

Meerut-250 001

Uttar Pradesh

India

Abt. Vertrieb

An der Iller 44-46

D-87509 Immenstadt

Phone: +49 (0)8323/95 527-0...

www.erpobueromoebel..de

Ust. ID No, DE 812.017 779

September 25, 20.

Quantity Description Unit price Eure Total Price Euro

100 Ergonomic Office Chair ÖFM-241 135.50 13,550.00

100 Ergonomic Task Chair OFM-3'12 145.20 14,520.00

Subtotal 28,070.00

10% quantity discount - 280700

TOTAL |

CIF Mumbai 25,263.00

Please remit the net invoice amount within 30. days from date of commercial invoice

to our account with Bayernbank AG, BIC: BABADET T304

--- Seite 29 ---

2 Different methods of payment Terms of payment in international trade

. nn of pope. Which are used in Foe epee 5] “basic The terms of payment chosen in an international transaction will depend on the size of

ie ba oniaiia | payment the order, the customers credit rating, and the banking system and political situation in

b Do some research online to get to know more about how the different means of the customer's country

payment work.

1 Terms of payment and risk assessment

c Read the statements below. Match each one with the correct means of payment from ed

ten ba a Read the description of the different terms of payment in international trade. Carry out a risk

, assessment by putting the terns of payment into an order from low to high risk. Start with

Means of payment “cash with order” (low risk) and end with “open account terms” (high risk).

cash bank transfer creditcard debit card cheque billofexchange letter of credit A Cash with order (CWO) involves very little risk. The seller demands that payment covering

Definitions the cost of merchandise and delveny accompany the customer's order

1. Customers use a card with a PIN to enable the money to be transfered to the seller's B Cash on delivery (COD) is riskier for the seller. The carrier or postman delivers the goods to

bank account. The money Is taken from the customer's account immediately. the customer and hands them over after the customer has paid the amount in question or

2. The customer arranges a transaction with their bank to have a sum sent from their the client has shown proof by the bank that the amount has been received.

account to the seller's account. j

3, Awritten slip from the seller to the customer, ordering them to pay the amount C inthe case of long-term business relationships with trusted relations, or large orders

immediately or within a given A : involving the supply of large goods like machinery or services such as the installation of

equipment, the seller may also allow staggered payment. The payment is spread over a

4, Acontractual document involving the seller, their bank, the customer and the austomer's shine ies Eeered pay paym P j

bank. It is opened by the customer's bank, which at the end also releases the documents period of time, for example one third with the order, one third on delivery and one third

j Bi 30 days after delivery.

required for the goods to be received. ¥s se

5. Awritten slip on which the customer promises to pay a sum to the recipient. The recipient D Payment in advance is similar to CWO. Payment must be effected before shipment. It

takes the slip to their bank and exchanges it for cash or has It pald directly Into their provides maximum security for the seller, especially when the goods or services are

account. customised.

6. Money is exchanged immediately at the point of sale, usually in notes and coins. E Drawing a bill of exchange (B/E) Is a very risky form of payment but common amon

7. Customers use a card with a PIN to enable the money to be transferred to the seller's Pape uuarkiendie ei eig pf ines bosch for a longer period of a

bank account. The money Is paki by 8 company wilich later Sends IE to the customer, e.g. 60 days after the billof exchange has been drawn. When the customer's bank

advances the money minus a bank discount long before the bill of exchange is due, the

seller receives the money immediately.

F Amore complex term is the documentary letter of credit. The risk of a delay in payment or

default payment is low due to the fact that the customers receive the documents needed

to receive the goods only after payment has been made by their bank. A confirmed L/C

provides even more security for the exporter 5 a bank Im their own country is responsible

for payment.

G The seller can pram the customer credit with open credit terms, such as: 30 days net,

% days 2%. This means that the buyer has to remit the invoice amount within 30 days. if

they pay within 10 days, they are entitled to deduct 2% of the Invoice amount. These terns

provide a high risk for the seller but are widely used in transactions involving small sums

or with trusted customers.

H Payment on receipt of invoice. The customer has to effect payment on the date when the

invoice is received.

I Open account terms are typically granted to well-established and trusted business

partners. Payment has to be effected after the goods have been delivered. However,

the customer does not pay individual invoices but waits for the regular statements of

account agreed upon with the seller. These contain the balance outstanding on the

customer's account on a fixed date, eg. the 20th of every month

oO U 22x N DC

--- Seite 30 ---
#gram 2

prepositions

Ergo Büromöbel GmbH offers different terms of payment to different customers. Complete

the risk assessment for Ergo Bümmöbel GmbH and their customers and suggest suitable

terms of payment.

Customers:

1. Office Time Ltd., Edinburgh, reliable austomer of office furniture. Ergo Büromöbel Is

anxious to sequre a large order with Office Time Ltd, which insist on being granted credit

for 60 days

2. Le Studio, Brussels, new customer of stationery. They ordered stationery two years ago

and had difficulty paying even a small amount of €50.00.

3. Home-Office Solutions plc, New York, bulk buyer and business partner for two years. They

usually buy office equipment worth US $50,000.00 every month.

4. Patel Office Equipment, Meerut, new customer from India. They have ordered office

funiture worth €25,263.00.

5. Bankbüros, Zurich, very trusted business partner with regular orders. They have been

doing business for 10 years and Bankbüros has never missed payment.

6. New Moon Offices, Tokyo, new customer for customised home office furniture. They have

never done business before with Ergo Buromobel GmbH.

¢ Work in groups of four and discuss your risk assessments. Give reasons for your choices and

present them in class

Using the right payment terms

Complete the sentences using the correct term or phrase.

payable at billof exchange onthebasisof asrequested at maturity in our favour

under ouragreement validuntil for the difference open account terms to your account

1. We are enclosing our pro forma invoice

2. We are enclosing our monthly statement of account showing a balance of $179,995.05

3. Enclosed we are sending you our cheque as the first instalment of

4, Please let us have a credit note

5. As we have been doing business TV documents against payment for five years, we would

like to ask you to grant us

6. AS arranged, we have drawn on youa 77 at 60 days.

7. Payment is to be effected by irrevocablie letter of credit In our favour, a German bank

and 30 April

&. We have transferred the amount with LG bank.

9, We will duly honour the bill

oO U 22x N DC

Solving glitches in payment

Agreeing on terms of payment, issuing invoices, and making payments is both an

essential 45 well a5 Sensitive part OF doing business. [here are many reasons why things

Can 20 Wrong. In order to Maintain Food business relations, it is always important to snow

understanding, communicate politely and know how to darify the situation

Listening to a voicemail and correcting an invoice

Sakura Sakal from New Moon Offices in Tokyo, a wholesaler for office furniture, left a

voicemail for Jochen Hoffmann, head of sales at Ergo Büromöbel GmbH. She refers to a

number of discrepancies in the pro forma invoice she received from Ereo Büromöbel GmbH.

a Listen to Ms Sakal’s message and look at the pro forma invoice below.

PRO FORMA INVOICE R-TKS8-22/06

Büromöbel x

To: New Moon Offices GmbH | aus)

I-6 Nishiikebukuro

Toshima 171-8505 Abt. Vertrieb

Prefecture Tokyo Ander ler 44-46

Japan D-87509 Immenstadt

Phone: +49 (0)8323/9552-0...

10 July 20.. www.ergobueromoebel.de

Ust. ID No. DE 812017 779

Dear Ms Saki,

Thank you for your order for 25 double desks and 25 office chairs.

Quantity Description Unit price Euro Total Price Euro

25 double desk DD-155, atomic grey 257.40 6,435.00

25 office chairs OCC-47 89.80 4,490.00

Subtotal 40,925.00

3% quantity discount “RS

TOTAL

FAS Tokyo 10,597.25

Payment is to be made in advance. Shipment will be effected after receipt of

payment

b Now answer Mr Hoffmann's questions in German.

1. Was ist der Grund für Frau Sakais Anruf?

2. Wann benötigt Frau Sakai die Ware?

3. Wie soll die Ware befördert werden?

4, Um weiche Zahlungsbedingungen bittet Frau Sakai?

--- Seite 31 ---
a, aia

WORKSHOPC | aire

c Write an emall reply to Ms Sakal and include the following details given to you by Business scenario

Mr Hoffmann a5 well a5 the corrected pro forma Invoice.

Als Auszubildende/- bei der Arma Sorelos GmbH (Schwedenstr. 15, 30161 Hannover)

einem Landmaschinenhersteller, haben Se im Namen Ihres Vorpesetzten Köobert Bauer

— Donke für Ihre Bestellung NE 155 555 vom 7. juli

— freuen uns mitteilen zu können, dass alle Produkte auf Lager sind

-— haben bereits Vereinbarungen mit unserem Seehofenspediteur getroffen; können

bestätigen, dass die Lieferung Tokio vor dem 30. August erreichen wird

— die Bestellung wird CFR Tokio versendet, sobald wir die Benachrichtigung zu Ihrem

Dokumentenokkreditiv erhalten haben

— onbel korrigierte Proformarechnung

— hdéflicher Schluss und bitte in meinem Namen unterschreiben

ein ANPeDot an die schwedische Firma Lantbruk AB (Klockarpatar /, 5612123 Stockholm

»chweden) geschickt. Sie haben daraufhin, am 5. April, eine Bestellung won Lantbruk AB

über 5 Erntemaschinen, Modell EM33, Stückpres 1.000 Euro erhalten

2 Reacting to incorrect payment

Ergo Buromobel GmbH delivered ergonomic chairs to Patel Office Equipment In India,

They received payment which does not cover the Whole amount Stated on the invoice.

éskillemall a Write an email on behalf of Birgit Rasch from the accounts department of Ergo Büromöbel

GmbH to Sadhu Patel, Patel Office Equipment, using the details from Ms Rasch’s notes below,

-— Bitte schreiben Sie eine E-Mail an Herrn Sadhu Patel, Patel Office Equipment,

3.potel@patel-office-equipment..com; Bedanken Sie sich für die Bestellung

= Bestäti Sie d ti hi | der Rechn Ne. R-BS31-42/09. z

ec nom a ee Oe N: : Pt) hee Schreiben Sie im Namen Ihres Vorgesetzten eine Auftragsbestätigung sowie eine

= Machen Sie Herrn Potel höflich darauf aufmerksam, dass der eingegangene Betrag i

: : Auer Proformarechnung an Ole Sörensen von der Firma Lantbruk AB. Orientieren Sie sich dabei an

24.292,00€ beträgt. Die ursprüngliche Rechnungssumme beläuft sich aber auf Ihrem Angebot aus Unit 3 (Selte 32)

25,263,00€ Bitten Sie höflich um eine Rückmeldung, um diese Situation zu 5 ;

berichtigen =

a? ; : : trae Wenige Tage nachdem die erste Zahlung von Lantbruk AB eingegangen Ist, erhalten Sie

. recente SLR Pa MER EU NE BE ER BE = an die E-Mail on einen Anruf von Ole Sörensen. Er erinnert Sie daran, dass beim Besuch in Hannover ein

= ore : . Bu ul Einführungsrabatt von 5% In Aussicht gestellt wurde. Dieser wurde in der Rechnung nicht

berücksichtigt.

sgramtenses b Mr Patel receives the email from Ereo Büromöbel GmbH and checks the online bank Führen Sie das Gespräch mit einem Partner / einer Partnerin. — Role card B, p. 119

remittance form with the invoice. Something went wrong. Mr Patel calls his bank for BE

clarification. He Is told that his bank deducted costs for the transaction and the currency Role Card A - Sorglos GmbH

exchange, amounting to the equivalent of €971.00, from the amount of the invoice. He Nehmen Sie den Anruf der Firma Lantbruk AB freundlich entgegen.

realises that he forgot to Instruct his bank to debit all the charges to his account. Sagen Sie, dass Sie die Rechnung auf Ihrem Rechner aufrufen und fragen Sie nach dem

Mr Patel arranges to have the difference remitted by bank transfer within 36 hours. Anliegen des Anrufers

Write an email on behalf of Sadhu Patel to Ms Rasch. Airst apologise for this error and then Sagen Sie, dass Sie sich an diese Vereinbarung erinnern und dass Sie sich dafür

explain what happened and how you intend to adjust the mistake. entschuldigen, dass der Rabatt nicht ausgewiesen wurde.

Bieten Sie an, eine Gutschrift über den Rabatt-Betrag für Lantbruk AB auszustellen.

Bedanken Sie sich für das Verständnis. Kündigen Sie eine E-Mail an, in der Sie das

Ba ES an Es Sen Ca Telefon gespräch zusammenfassen werden und stellen Sie in Aussicht, dass die Gutschrift

1. ... Showing a balance of € 17.20 te-ourtevour iin our favour, im Lauf der Woche erstellt werden wird

. COMMON MISTAKES

2. We have transfered transferred the amount on to your account by with XYZ Bank. » Sagen Sie, dass Sie sich über zukünftige Geschaftsbeziehungen freuen und verabschieden

3. Checking your invoice we noted noticed the following error. Se Sich angemessen

4. Please notice note that part shipments are not allowed.

5. As We are-deine business chace have been doing business for two years ... ee im Anschluss an Ihr Gespräch mit Hern Sorensen schreiben Sie eine E-Mail an ihn, um

6. Payment should-be-made is to be made by letter of credit. den Inhalt des Gesprächs schriftlich festzuhalten. Sie senden eine Kopie der E-Mail an

7. The bank will open a letter of credit, payable by at a German bank and valid up-to Ihren Vorgesetzten, Herm Bauer.

until 31 july

oO U. gow DC we 7 &

--- Seite 32 ---
Review

Before you test yourself in Exam proctice, take a few moments to reflect on what you

have just learned. Then make a follow-up plan: What do you need to improve before the

final exam? How will you go about getting there? You can check again after Exam practice

5] #basic In this unit, you have learned how to ...

wae iin issue a pro forma invoice and a commercial invoice | solve glitches in payment by letter and

email | talk about payment in telephone calls | negotiate terms of payment

‘| Considering these topics and tasks, ask yourself:

Vocabulary Do | know all the relevant words and phrases to ...

paymen talk about terms of payment | talk about means of payment | issue invoices |

write emails and letters about discrepancies in payment?

Can I understand and use these relevant words and phrases confidently in

speaking and writing?

Can | adapt my language to the medium /channel | use (letter, email, phone)?

#gram Grammar When writing and/or speaking, did | come across a common source of

4] prepaestions grammar mistakes?

eeramtenses If so, how can | avoid these mistakes and improve in this particular area?

eukillinwolee Writing Do | know the elements an invoice has to contain?

#sklliemall Do | know the structure of an invoice?

What do | need to consider when issuing a pro forma invoice?

| What do | need to consider when issuing commercial invoices?

What de | need to consider when issuing letters or emails to inform business

partners about payment/ delay in payment /wrong payment?

What common mistakes are often made when issuing an invoice?

.r “skill Speaki Can | negotiate terms of payment on the phone!

phonecall 2 : 2. .

Can | talk about diserepancies in payment?

Methods / Do I know how to spell correctly and can | take down invoice numbers?

Strategies

2 Use your answers from 7 to create a learning and revision plan.

WHAT? HOW? WHEN!

What do | need to work on? © What willl do to improve? | When do | want to complete this?

TIP Fe ea oi ca sc Sl eee se

To improve your speaking skills, listen to native language speakers. There are many tutorials

‘ about terms of payment, methods of payment, and issuing invoices on the internet. Try to

' (watch and understand one tutorial per week.

oO U 22x N DC

Exam practice

1 Kurgefasste schriftliche Mitteilung (Bearbeitungszeit 30 Minuten)

~~, fio

Sie arbeiten bei der E-Bike Spezialist GmbH. Einer Lieferung von Aluminium-Rohren für die

E-Bike-Rahmen lag eine Rechnung bei, die Unstimmigkeiten aufweist. Herr Nikolal Wemer,

Ihr Vorgesetzter, legt Ihnen die Rechnung zusammen mit folgendem Vermerk auf den Tisch.

bitte diese Rechnung bei Frou Yang beanstanden

Folgende Aspekte stimmen nicht

— bei Position Tist der Betrag falsch, es müssten 2,955.00 US $ sein

— bei Position 2 ist die falsche Menge berechnet worden, die gelieferte Menge

ist korrekt, geliefert wurden 115 Stück zum Gesomitpreis von 1782,50 US$

Bitte um korrigierte Rechnung, da die Zahlung sonst nicht angewiesen werden kann

per E-Mail mit Ce on mich (nikolal werner @e-bike speziolist...de)

Metal Unlimited ple.

E-Bike Spezialist GmbH 2.6-] Marunouchi

Altenhoffmannstr. 222 Chivoda-ku

45128 Essen Tokyo

Germany Chivoda-ku, 100-8071

order No.5T22/202-79037 person in charge: Ms Milan Yang

invoice No. IST 12/23-45 phone: +81 3 686721 3-99...

31 March 20. milanyang@metal..com

wwumetäl.com

Invoice IST 1 2/23-45 for aluminium tubes

Thank you for your order of our aluminium tubes, AT169 and AT 172

As agreed, we charge you for the following items:

Pos. Quantity Description Unit Price USS Total Price USS

20.00 mm = 0,51mm = 1,000.00mm

net kes 0.86

2 100 ADT AZ 15.50 1,550.00

4.00mm = 0.7mm «© 1,200.00 mm

net kes 161

NET TOTAL, CIP Tokyo 3,914.00

Please remit the invoice amount within 30 days fromthe date of invoice to our

bank account 1546546133, Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UF], BIC: BOTKIJPITXKX.

If payment & made within | 4 days after the date of invoice, we will grant a | 5%

cash discount on the total amount of the invoice.

--- Seite 33 ---
Ft fio

EXAM PRACTICE PAYMENT

2 Vermerk über einen Geschäftsbriet (Bearbeitungszeit 30 Minuten) 3 Mündliche Prüfung: Telefongespräch (Dauer ca. 20 Minuten)

Sie machen eine Ausbildung bei der Ergo Bürmmöbel GmbH, einem führenden Hersteller und Üben Sie gemeinsam mit einem Partner / einer Partnerin.

Großhändler für ergonomische Bürmmöbel. In der Abwesenheit von Herm jochen Hoffmann Tauschen Sie nach einem Durchgang die Rollen. — Role card B, p. 120

aus der Verkaufsabtellung Asien bearbeiten Sie die eingehende Geschaftskorrespondenz.

Heute, am 16. juni, erhalten Sie ein Schreiben von der Firma New Moon Offices aus Tokio.

Fassen Sie den Inhalt des Briefes für Herrn Jochen Hoffmann In einem Vermerk in deutscher

Sprache zusammen (vollständige Sätze, keine Übersetzung). Sie sind Teamassistent/in bei der Arma 545 Print GmbH, einem führenden Hersteller von

bedruckten T-Shirts in Duisburg, Sie haben eine Bestellung der GIVIX LTD, Glasgow, am

7. Februar ausgeführt. Das Rechnungsdatum ist der 10. Februar mit einem Zahlungsziel von

30 Tagen. Heute, am 20. März ist immer noch kein Zahlungseingang zu verzeichnen

Frau Meyer aus der Buchhaltung hat bereits eine Zahlungserinnerung an den Kunden

New Moon Offices geschickt.

1 Nishiil ; Die IBAN Ihrer Firma ist DE38 3504 0085 0134 3231 31.

Role card A - Kandidat/-in

10 a” schist ; ppg Ihre Vorgesetzte Michaela Kurz bittet Se Herrn O'Connor von der Firma GIVIX LTD anzurufen,

} ae ae dees ER um die Situation zu klären. Sie schreibt Ihnen dazu folgende EMail

An der Wer 44-46 Prefecture Tok yo

37509 Immenstadt

GERMANY

person in charge: Mr Mian Youn

order No. TK-43-864/22 Phone «819 134453- 16... Liebeir

pro forma invoice No. PRI15/22-1876 xianyoun@new moon-offices...com

14 August 20 ae bitte rufen Sie Herm O'Connor von der Firma GIVIX LTD an, um die ausstehende Rechnung

(Kr. R-186-1002/'02, Betrag: 2.500,00 Euro) zu klären. Fragen Sie nach, ob mit der Bestellung alles

>: In Ordnung war und ob es ggf. Gründe für die ausstehende Zahlung gibt.

Your pro-forma invoice PRIL5/22-1876 and Letter of credit Bu oF is

No $17022345/LC/ 14-6-23 Prufen Sie Zusammen mit Ihm, ob Rechnungsbetrag und Kontodaten korrekt sind

Dear Mr Hoffmann Falls ein Fehler unsererseics vorliegt, bieten Sie Henm O'Connor an, dass wir einen Machlass in

j j Höhe von 5% auf den Rechnungsbetrag gewähren.

Thank you for your confirmation pro forma, as referred to above. Dasten Dank

We have instructed our bank to issue an irrevocable and confirmed letter of credit in Machines KUFZ ¥

your favour. This is to be confirmed by Barclay’ International Bank, Singapore and

will expire on 30 September at the latest

We have also handed over the required documents, which will be sent to your bank

in München. Upon presentation of the commercial invoice in quadruplicate, air

way bill in triplicate and your certificate of origin in duplicate, your bank will pay out

the invoice amount to you

Please inform us of the exact date of shipment, as the latest date of shipment is

20 September. Partial or transshipments are not allowed

We trust that the consignment will arrive safely and your products will meet our

sustainable quality expectations and our customers’ approval.

We look forward to receiving your information on shipment soon

yours sincerely,

Xian Youn

Alan Youn

Import Manager

OU 220 NND CC ee

--- Seite 34 ---
~~, fio

* Written complaints

"basic If there is something wrong with a consignment or transaction, the customer should

an inform the seller immediately. Often it will be enough just to telephone or send an email

=| COM PLAI NTS AN D h in order for the supplier to suggest a solution to the problem. However, if the problem is

more serious or the customer feels that his/her complaint is not being taken seriously

AD] U S M E N | S . . enough, he/she may deade to write a letter of complaint. Complaints follow certain rules

| regarding Structure and language. Particularly, in the Enpl&h-speaking world, the

language of complaints is far more indirect, polite and conciliatory

skill “| Structure of a detailed complaint

complaint Watch the parts of a detailed complaint to the corresponding sentences (1-7) in the letter

complaint below.

action taken or to be taken by the customer likely reasons forthe problem salutation

request for prompt adjustment detailed description of the problem solution suggested

detailed reference to the order

Dear Mr jakobeit, I

Subject: Our order no. G/L400 for Desk Lamps [?)

Yesterday the consignment of 500 Walnut Wood Adjustable Desk Lamps from the

above-mentioned order placed on 10 February was delivered by the forwarder

Transcontinental.

On unpacking the boxes, however, our poods inwards inspector found that we had

received 600 instead of 500 desk lamps and that the desk lamps are equipped with

1 Different reasons for complaints oe a EE 7/4 plugs and not with British BS 1363 plugs, as required for

a Think: When did you (or someone you know) have problems with an order? What went a

wrone? What did you / they do? We can only assume that our order has been mixed up with another customer's

b Pair: Talk about your experiences with a partner. Think of possible solutions to your problem. antes. i

Since we have committed to delivering the majority of the desk lamps we ordered to

c Share: Share your results and experiences in class '

zwi P our own customers by the end of the month, we would ask you to send us the correct

> cosnieiak of a cnrvntabit number of desk lamps with the right plugs as soon as possible. The goods must

What is u wurliine a Connpiaine? Come the table had Goninlete le wah woikis fine reach us by the end of the week, otherwise we shall have no alternative but to cancel

the box u) r ig " the order, however much we may regret such a step. 5]

We are holding the wrong goods at your disposal, pending your instructions. Is]

description of the problem firm telephone order numberand date repair customer's loss

or inconvenience email invoicenumber express delivery polite compensation letter of We trust that you will understand our predicament and do your utmost to have the

complaint discount date of delivery unemotional correct desk lamps dispatched without delay. 7]

Yours sincerely,

Ways of communication Things to be included Goalofacomplaint Style of language used isabella Woodhouse

Isabella Woodhouse

Purchasing Director

oO U 22x N DC

--- Seite 35 ---
WORKSHOP A COMPLAINTS

2 Being polite

Write down the following direct, rather impolite sentences in a more indirect, polite way.

1. We are dissatisfied with the consignment.

. We expect you to send replacements immediately.

. You have made a mistake.

. If the goods don't arrive on time, we will cancel the order.

. You must understand our problem.

eskillemait 3 Complaints by email

hiara Krauss is a trainee in the purchasing department of Wohntraum GmbH. She writes a

omplete her email with 10 of the 12 words below

oe imal

2] complaint to Than Chin from Glasses and jugs Ltd. in China

with during wrongly until on from despite damaged be find assoonas before

@O@uzkz OW

From: Chiara Krauss A

To: tchingjelassesand juesttd com.cn

Date: 3 November 20

subject: Our order No. 6581

Dear Mr Chin,

Thank you for the delivery of the above order. Box No.1 containing the juice jugs reached us in

perfect condition, however we regret to inform you that box No. 2 containing the tumblers was

badly WU and looked as if it had been crushed or dropped (2) transport

Most of the glasses are broken or chipped and cannot 8 sold. We suggest that you contact your

forwarding agent | regard to compensation.

5 examination of the enclosed packing list, we found that the wine glasses in box No, 3 differ

© those we ordered. Our order was for 50 isems of article No, GW-3-662 The glasses you

supplied seem to be article No. GW-3-668. We would be grateful if you could send us the correct

articles 7 possible

Please (& enclosed a detailed list of the damaged goods. These will be srored at our warehouse

# we hear from you. We willalso keep the box with the WW delivered wine glasses so that your

haullers can retum them to you when they deliver the correct articles.

Best regards,

Chiara Krauss

Purchasing Department ¥

olals

complal nt

eck ilimemo

eskill

complal

compl al mt

4 Receiving a complaint by email

Sie arbeiten für die Firma Solarspeicher AG in Rostock. Sie haben eine Beschwerde von Alba

Gomez von der Firma Nova Solar (Malaga, Spanien) erhalten. Lesen Sie die Beschwerde und

erstellen Sie einen Vermerk auf Deutsch für Ihren Chef, Mark Fuchs.

From: alba gomezepnovasolar....es A

To: mfuchs@solarspeicher, . .de

Dave: 28 November 20

Subject: Late delivery of Solar 5 batteries in black battery bowes

Dear Mr Fuchs,

We refer to our order SB 345 dated 23 October tor 400 Solar 5 batteries in white battery boxes

and 300 Solar 5 batteries in black battery bowes, which you said you could deliver ex stock

We received the 400 Solar 5 batteries in white battery bowes on time, however, the 300 Solar5

batrertes in black battery boxes are mow two weeks overiue

Over the phone on 22 November, you promked delivery within four days

AS we need the batteries urgently, we will be forced to cancel this order unless we receive the

batterkes within the next week. We expect you to bear the charges for express delivery.

Yours sincerely

Alba Gomer

Purchasing Manager ¥

5 Writing a letter of complaint

Sie haben eine Ausbildung als Industriekaufmann/-frau mit der Zusatzqualifikation Englisch

abgeschlossen und arbeiten für das süddeutsche Unternehmen Motorenwerke Böblingen

(Stuttgarter Straße 20, 07031 Böblingen). Ihr Chef, Mark Eggensperger, hat Sie gebeten, in

seinem Namen einen Beschwerdebrief an Frau Heywood von AB Filter Technology Lid.

(121 Alton Road, Guildford, GU 34 9LZ) wegen der letzten Lieferungen und der Bestellung

hr. PFP-426 vom 4. September zu schreiben. Folgende Punkte müssen in ihrem Brief

enthalten sein:

- regelmäßige Bestellung von Filtern und Filterkartuschen seit vier Jahren

- drei Jahre long sehr zufrieden

- seit einem Jahr lassen Leistung und Qualitat nach und wurden immer schlechter

(Ware nicht auf Lager, immer längere Lieferzeiten, tagelang keine Antwort auf

E-Mails, immer andere Personen am Telefon)

— ollein in diesem Jahr wurden einmal der falsche Filter und einmol zu wenig

Kartuschen geliefert

— aktueller Vorfall heute: Zusendung von fünf Kartuschen des Typs HPC 17 tb statt wie

bestellt HPC 1616

— Bitte um unverzlgliche Zusendung der richtigen Kartuschen und Abholung der

falschen Kartuschen durch den Lieferanten

= Drohung den Liefervertrag nicht zu verlängern, sollte keine Besserung in den

nächsten drei Monoten eintreten

- Hoffnung, dass so ein Schritt nicht notwendig sein wird

- Angemessener Schluss

--- Seite 36 ---
WORKSHOP B COMPLAINTS

Adjusting complaints in writing

If a customer ¢ omplains abo ac DIBIEN ment or service you should abv ays take it

Seriously, however minor, and deal With it Promptly. YOU should always respond ina

positive Way and convey to the customer that you appreciate and repret the inconvenience

caused. If you decide that the complaint is justified, you will either grant the adjustment

a5 Suppested by the client or sugpest a possible compromise which must take the

customer's interests sufficiently into account. If the complaint 5 unjustified, explain your

reasoning before rejecting it

1 Structure of a detailed adjustment letter

Match the different parts of a detailed adjustment letter to the corresponding sentences

(1-9) In the letter below

suggestions for adjustment goodwill ending action to be taken by customer reference to

complaint subject line promise of improvement investigation/explanation apologies

salutation

Dear Ms Woodhouse, M

Subject: Your order no. G/L400 for 500 Walnut Wood Adjustable Desk Lamps (1)

We have just received your complaint regarding your above-mentioned order.

informing us of a most regrettable mix-up of orders. 13]

Please accept our apologies for the inconvenience caused by this mistake on our

part. M

You were quite right. Your order was indeed mixed up with an Austrian customer's

order. | investigated the matter immediately and found out that the mix-up was

caused by a person hired from a temporary work agency during the Easter holiday

season. [5

500 Walnut Wood Adjustable Desk Lamps with BS 1363 plugs will be dispatched to

you free of charge by lorry first thing tomorrow morning. The forwarder,

Transcontinental, have given us the assurance that the consignment will arrive at

your distribution centre in Basingstoke by Wednesday afternoon al the latest

To make up for the inconvenience caused, we will grant you a 5% discount on your

nextorder. |

Please hand over the consignment sent by mistake to the Transcontinental driver,

who willissue a formal receipt, M

We will assure you that we will take all possible steps to ensure that such a mistake

will not occur again () and hope that this unfortunate incident will not affect our

excellent business relationship ia |

Yours sincerely.

Jens Jakobeit

Jens Jakoben

Sales Manager

oO U 22x N DC

2 Adjustments by email

Mr Than Chin, Sales Manager from Glasses and jugs Lid. answers Chiara’s email

Read the emall and choose the correct alternative.

From: Glasses and jugs a

To: Chiara Krauss

Date: 4 November 20.

Subject: Re: Our order No. 6581

Dear Ms Krauss,

Thank you for youremail "Eeiftem this morning. | was extremely sorry to hear thatthe above

order had not been delwered to your full satisfaction and | wish to Eee me /apolagisn for

the inconvenience caused by this mistake on our part.

| have looked Into this matter and itseems thatthe 2 damagels/danageiare due to rough

handling and that the problem les | &. by/with the shipping department. We will monitor the

department's performance more carefully in the future.

The damaged glasses willof course be exchanged 9. with/through/fer) mew ones

AS you mentioned in your email box No. 3 contained 50 items of article No. GW-3-668 instead of

50 items of article No, GW-3-667. The error occurred due to the fact that the packages are

é. prectcally/ practical (dentical

The correct glasses have already been arranged for 7) immediate/immediamty dispatch and will

be sent to WOU at OUT EL mpenditure/expense

You may return the wrongly delivered goods 2 we/at our risk and expense or hand them over

to our hauliers when they deliver the correct articles

We have maintained an excellent business relationship  simefier many years and | hope

this will continue.

I book forward to fi deing/do business with you again in the future.

Best wishes,

Than Chin

Sales Manager ¥

3 Types of adjustment

Match each type of adjustment to the correct definition.

discount expressdelivery replacement substitute repair release from contract

maw eS we =

the fastest way of dispatching goods

. anew delivery of identical goods

. Branting a reduction of the usual price

. terminating a supplier relationship (due to their inadequate performance)

. the act of restoring something damaged or faulty to a good condition

. anew delivery of similar products

--- Seite 37 ---
> To mm

Making and adjusting complaints over the phone

If you are dissatisfied with a consignment, the quickest way to solve the problem 6 over

the phone because you Can make both the Complaint and adjustment at he same ime

it you Know the person you are ringing, you usually ask how they are doing beiore you get

down to business. If you are about to mention a problem, you should be firm but polite

50 that the ssue can be solved to the satefaction of all parties concerned

Calling Moreale Cosmetics

jasmin Kulzer from Kufstadt GmbH calls Chris Peters from Moreale Cosmetics. Listen to the

dialogue and complete the transcript with the missing words.

Good morning. Moreale Cosmetics Inc., Chris Peters on the 4

How can | help you?

Hello Chris, this is jasmin from Kufstadt GmbH In Augsbure. How are you

Nice to hear from you. I'm doing great 3 about you jasmin, how are you!

I'm fine too. |) busy at work, though. I'm calling about our 50 for 10 cases

of Moreale TechOne and 10 cases of TechTwo hair gel which we |@ at the

end of November The IT was K5-674,

Let me just check that on my computer. OK, I've found It. Did something go

# something did go wrong. When we unpacked the goods, we that

two cases of the Moreale TechOne gel were missing.

I'm sorry to hear that. | really have to # for that mistake. I'll send out the

missing cases 2

That would be perfect, a5 we need them @ . Thanks a lot.

You're WI hope to hear from you again soon. Goodbye.

Goodbye and thanks a lot for your help.

jasmin Kulzer:

jasmin Kulzer:

jasmin Kulzer:

jasmin Kulzer:

jasmin Kulzer:

How to deal with complaints over the phone

Copy the following table. Then listen to the three dialogues and complete the table.

Dialogue = Problem Action taken

Reason for problem | Adjustment

’ Discuss the following points In class.

1. Was the complaint properly dealt with?

2. How would you have acted in these situations?

3, Have you experienced any similar situations?

oO U 22x N DC

“skill

phonecall

honecall

3 Role play: Making a complaint about wrongly delivered goods

Ruth Bennet, Purchasing Manager at The Bike Factory in Leipzig placed an order with Guptha

Rubbers PLC in Mumbai for heavy-duty tyres. When the consignment arrives in Leipzig,

Ms Bennet leams that the tyres which have been sent are the wrong size. She calls Rahul

Khan, Sales Manager at Guptha Rubbers, to inform him and to discuss a possible adjustment.

Work with a partner. Take the roles of Ruth Bennet and Rahul Khan. Look at the prompts

below and act out the telephone conversation.

Guptha Rubbers, Rahul Khan speaking /

how help?

hello/ Ruth Bennet, The Bike Factory

Europe / reason for calling: order for

heavy-duty tyres

hope everything alright

afraid / something wrong with last

consignment

sorry to hear/ order number?

which goods ondered?/ what is wrong?

500 sets of Badger X3 heavy-duty tyes /

diameter of 26 inches / received

250 sets in the wrong size, 28 inches

very sorry / mix-up just found your order |

ordered 2éinch tyres only /what do? / keep

tyres? /5 % discount on the invoice amount?

5% not enough / do not need so many tyres

of bigger size/ store them for quite a while /

extra costs 20 % discount?

20% not possible {might be able to offer a

12% discount / but first check with my boss

= N id sounds okay /when expect missing 250 sets

of 26-inch tyres?/ them in three weeks’

time

no problem at all/ get back to you later

today my boss's decision

perfect/expect your call as soor as

possible / goodbye

! COMMON MISTAKES

. I refer to our order about for heavy-duty tyres.

One article Is complete completely damaged.

, The damages-are damage is due to ...

. We wish to excuseus apologise for ...

. Please replace the faulty goods by with new ones to at your expense.

. We will keep the goods te at your disposal.

The problem lies by with the shipping depanment.

. The faulty articles will be exchanged with/throueh for working ones.

. We would suggest torefer referring / that we refer the matter to arbitration.

a Min a

--- Seite 38 ---
BUSINESS SCENARIO COMPLAINTS

Business scenario

Sie arbeiten im Kundenservice von The Bike Factory Europe in Leipzie. Vor drei Tagen

haben Sie eine Lieferung von 100 Fahrrad T->hirts an Cycling Lid. in Beitast geschickt

ihr Vorpesetrter Richard Becker hat heute eine E-Mail von

Fassen Sie die wichtigsten Inhalte der Nachricht für Ihren Vorgesetzten In ganzen Sätzen auf

Deutsch zusammen.

Lycline Ltd. bekommen

From: nancyumcmarageeyelinglimited...be A

To: richard beckergthebikefactory ...de

Subject: Our order Wo. DE 32465/28

Dear Mr Becker,

We received your shipment of our order for 100 “Hurricane” cycling T-shirts today

We regret to inform you that we have been sent che wrong oner On opening the boxes we

immediately saw that the Tshins we had been sent were not only the wrong colour bur also only

one size, L. We originally ordered 25 shirts of each of the sizes 5, M, Land XL, and we selected the

dark blue colour while the Tshirts we received were black

We are however willing to keep 30 of the Fshins at a reduced price

Since we will need the dark blue shirts for a cycling event on next week's Bank Holiday Monday,

we expect a replacement delivery by the end of this week. The consignment should consist of

25 dark blue T-shirts in each of the sizes 5, M, Land XL.

would be grateful if you could get back to me with suggestions on how to settle the matter and

what we should do wich the other 70 black shirts

Best wishes,

Nancy Michdara

Sales Manager ¥

tae Nachdem Sie für Herrn Becker die Nachricht auf Deutsch zusammengefasst haben, schreibt

er Ihnen folgende E-Mail. Arbeiten Sie zu zweit und führen Sie das Telefonat. Tauschen Sie

anschließend die Roller. — Role card B, p. 120

Lieber ..., A

ich bin gerade in einem wichtigen Meeting und kann Nancy MeMara nicht selbst anrufen

Teiler Ste Ihr bitte mit, dass der Fehler auf unserer Seite liegt und entschuldigen Sie sich. Es gab

eine Verwechslung mit den Bestellungen. Sagen Sie Ihr, dass wir die Ersatzlieferung noch heute

per Express abschicken. Bleten She ihr ebenfalls an, dass sie die falsch gelleferten T-Shirts mit

einem Rabatt in Höhe von 10% behalten kann. Die restlichen 70 T-Shirts kann sie dem Spediteur

wieder mitgeben

Bitre schreiben Sie mir eine kurze Telefonnotiz und informieren Sie mich über das Ergebnis des

Telefonates.

Vielen Dank.

Richard Becker ¥

ieee Fassen Sie die Ergebnisse des Telefongespräches mit Nancy McMara für Ihren Vorgesetzten

auf Deutsch Zusammen.

oO U 22x N DC

Fe ad

Review

Before you test yourself in Exam practice, take a few moments to reflect on what you

have just learned. Then make a follow-up plan: What do you need to improve before the

final exam? How will you go about getting there? You cancheck again after Exam practice

basic In this unit, you have learned how to ...

complaint write complaints and adjustments by email and letter | make complaints and adjustments over

the phone | give reasons for a complaint | describe a problem wath a consignment | give likely

reasons for a problem | suggest solutions | apologise | offer different types of adjustments |

promise improvement | write amemo in German about a complaint

‘| Considering these topics and tasks, ask yourself:

Vocabulary Do I know the relevant words and phrases needed to ...

complaint write complaints and adjustments by letter or email | make a complaint and

adjustment on the phone | give reasons for a complaint | describe a problem

with a consignment | give likely reasons for a problem | suggest solutions |

apologise | offer different types of adjustments | promise improvement?

Can | understand and use these relevant words and phrases confidently in

speaking and in writing?

Can | adapt my language to the medium / channel | use (letter, email, phone)?

Grammar When writing and/or speaking. did | come across a common source of

grammar mistakes?

If so, what was it and how can! practise and improve in this particular area?

ns kill Writing Do | know how to structure a complaint?

complaint

Do | know how to structure an adjustment?

What dol need to consider when writing a memo about a complaint in German?

What common mistakes are often made when writing complaints and

adjustments?

ea kill Speaking Can | make a complaint/adjustment over the phone?

phonecall

Methods / Do I know how to talk ower the phone to business partners | Know personally!

Strategies

Do | know how to be firm and polite when mentioning a problem?

2 Use your answers from 1 to create a learning and revision plan:

WHAT? HOW? WHEN?

What do | need to work on? What will | do to improve? When do I want to complete

this?

a RN SoS a ge os Crea ne re ee Be es oe ue sua

Using apps to practise words and phrases can help you to improve your English. :

‘ You can practise by playing games or making quizzes and you usually get instant feedback.

| Try to make a habit of practising words and phrases at least twice a week.

--- Seite 39 ---
EXAM PRACTICE COMPLAINTS

Exam practice

1 Geschaftsbrnef nach Stichworten (Bearbeitungszeit 45 Minuten)

Sie sind Auszubiidende/+ bei der Firma Orient Express GmbH, Oldenburger Str. 91,

27753 Delmenhorst. Ihre Firma hatte von einem neuen Lieferanten, dem malaysischen

Hersteller von traditionellen Textilien Golden Sun bhd, Level 24, Block C, Platinum

Sentral, 50470 Kuala Lumpur, Hals- und Schultertücher bestellt. Die Sendung Ist

gestern angekommen, entspricht aber nicht ganz den Erwartungen.

Ihr Chef, der Einkaufsleiter Wolfgang Elmer, bittet Sie, einen Brief in englischer

Sprache an Golden Sun bhd zu formulieren, den er unterschreiben wird. Folgende

Punkte sollen Sie berücksichtigen:

- Ansprechportnerin: Ms Marina Ratnasarıi

- Datum: 13. September 20

— Ihr Auftrag vom 0.2. August 20., Ihre Auftragsnummer: MY-87-13

- Ware pünktlich eingetröffen

- leider folgende Beanstandungen:

— 50 der bestellten 150 Seidenhalstücher, Best. Nr. 769, fehlen

= Oder bestellten 100 Schwitertücher, Best. Nr. 681, sind stark verfärbt und

daher wnverkäuflich

- Die 50 bestellten Schultertücher, Best. Nr. 687, entsprechen farblich und

was das Muster angeht nicht der Katalogbeschreibung

= Ihr Vorschlag zur Regelung:

- Sofortige Nachlieferung der fehlenden 50 Seidenhalsticher, für die große

Nachfrage besteht

= Sie sind bereit, die 50 Schulterticher mitder Best. Nr. 687 zu behalten,

wenn Ihnen ein Preisnachlass gewährt wird

- Sie bitten um Mitteilung, was mit den verfärbten Schultertüchern geschehen

soll

- Bitte um Stellungnahme und umgehende Bearbeitung Ihrer Reklamation

Bitte verfassen Sie einen vollständigen Brief mit Absenderadresse, Anschrift, Datum,

Anrede, Betreff, Grußformel Namen der Firma, Namen und Position des

Unterzeichners und evil, Anlagevermerk, der in der äußeren Form britischen bzw.

amerikanischen Gepflogenheiten entspricht.

oO U 22x N DC

~~, fio

2 Vermerk über ein Telefongespräch (Bearbeitungszeit 20 Minuten)

in dem folgenden Gespräch sind Sie Marcus Friedel von der Firma Büromöbel Bremer in

Erfurt. Heute ist der 7. juni. Sie erhalten einen Anruf von einem Kunden in Großbritannien.

Verfolgen Sie das Gespräch und fertigen Sie anschließend für Ihre Geschäftsführerin,

Angela Rentmeister, eine entsprechende Gesprächsnotiz auf Deutsch an.

Marcus Friedel T. Scott

Büromöbel Bremer, Friedel, Guten Tag.

I'm afraid he's on a business trip in Turkey so I'm standing in for him at the moment,

Can | be of any assistance?

Could you give me the order number please? I'll bring it up on my computer

Yes, here itis. | see it wasn't delivered on time but was afew days late. I'm very sorry

about that - | hope it hasn't caused you any inconvenience

Oh, I'm very sorry to hear that.

I'm sorry about that. Fil just make a note of this. $0, altogether three desk packs and

three chairs are defective. We'll send you replacements = soon a5 possible. Was

there anything else?

I really am very sorry that we have caused you this inconvenience. At the moment |

have no idea how it could have happened,

I can appreciate that and | can assure you that you are a very important customer

as far as we are concerned. | will let our export manager know as soon as he retums.

In the meantime, I'll check with my boss as to what we can do to remedy the

situation and Mil get back to you by email in the next couple of hours. Again, | very

much regret what has happened.

Definitely!

Buromobel Bremer

Gesprachsnotiz

Für: .

Verfasst von: ain: .

Gesprachspartner/in: ..

Betreff: .

--- Seite 40 ---

Requesting payment

“basic Business transactions are increasinely based on the granting credit and it is quite normal

reminder

that outstanding invoioes are not always settled on time. There is probably no company

whose accounts department has not spent a large amount of time trying to get customers

to pay outtanda NE IAVOICeS

1 Structure of a detailed reminder

a Match the different parts of a detalled reminder to the corresponding sentences (1-8) in the

letter below.

reminder

suggestion of oversighton debtor's part salutation request for payment, setting a deadline

steps to be taken unless payment is made reference to statement of account/due date/

previous reminder complimentary close request explanation, if appropriate goodwill ending

DearMs Pratt, fi

We referto our email of 30 October asking for settlement of our statement of

account No. UK/140-77 of 30 September, which is now five weeks overdue, [2]

Unfortunately, it seems that you have overseen the statement of account. [3]

As you have always paid your bills promptly, we are at aloss to understand this

delay in payment. [4

Nevertheless, we must ask you to remit the invoice amount within the next

10 days. 15] Should you fail to settle the account within this period, we will

unfortunately have to reconsider the terms of payment. [6]

We trust, however, that you will remit the outstanding amount in the next few

days and that our cordial business relations can be continued. [7

Yours sincerely, [8]

b What Is the purpose of the following sentences? Match the sentences (A-G) with the

1 Discuss the following questions with a partner and share your results In class. appropriate parts of a detalled reminder from exercise a.

1. What reasons might a customer have for not paying an invoice? A We wish to point out that your account still shows an outstanding balance of $7234.50 In

2. What is a good way of protecting yourself against bad debts (Aarderungsausfalie)? our favour

3. What should you do before sending goods to a customer? B You have not yet replied to our reminder from 3 june. Should you have any particular

4, What can suppliers do to encourage prompt payment? reason for withholding payment, please let us know immediately.

5. What do you think about borrowing money? (advantages/disadvantages) C Your arrears in payment constitute a breach of contract. We are considering breaking off

business relations with you,

2 Essential parts of a reminder D We would, therefore, ask you to remit the outstanding amount by the end of the week,

What do you think is essential for a reminder? What coments should be included, and what is E We hope that this matter will soon be settled to the satisfaction of both parties.

important when it comes to style and tone? Discuss in dass and make a list. F As we have now been waiting for settlement of our invoices for three months, we regret

that we will have to institute legal proceedings against you unless the balance of £745.90

is remitted to our account by 31 july

G Since you have always been a reliable customer, we assume that this invoice must have

been overlooked.

OULELOINDC er

--- Seite 41 ---
= 8 WORKSHOP A REMINDERS

reminder

wskillemail

2 Features of reminders

It is often necessary to send several written reminders to achieve the desired result. They will

gradually become more insistent intone, the seller being mindful of the customer's payment

record. The interval between the reminders may vary.

Read the details below and say if they describe a first, second or final reminder.

1. The first written reminder ... 2. The second reminder ... 3. The final reminder ...

A ... may often be included in other correspondence (hidden reminder).

B ... will be more insistent.

C ... could be used by the supplier to suggest reconsidering terms of payment If the invoice

remains unpaid, but he/she should still emphasise that he/she wishes to continue

business relations.

D ... Will point out that the customer will also have to pay Interest on arrears.

E ... (Includes a copy of the Invoice or statement of account.

F ...setsa final deadline for payment

G ... will appeal to the customer's sense of falmess and his desire to maintain his reputation

by stressing the consequences of non-payment.

H ... should be positive, understanding and avoid blaming the customer.

|... Should still be friendly, asking for an explanation but perhaps offering help while

requesting payment.

| ... warns the customer that should he/she fall to meet the deadline, the matter will be

handed over to a collection agency or a solicitor, while at the same time expressing regret

at having to take this step.

3 First reminder

Study this statement of account recording invoices for three deliveries from AB Filter

Technology to Motorermverke Böblingen and a credit note for a sum that had to be paid

by AB Filter Technology to Motorenwerke. Then read the lines on page 87. And the correct

Sentences and put them iin the right order for the email the statement was attached to.

AB Filter Technology Statement m per 1 Sept 20.

AB Filter Technology Ltd

121 Alton Road + Guildford - GU349LZ

Tel. 01962 841690... + Fax 01962 84369 11...

ww w.ab-lltertechnology-uk...com

Motorenwerke Boeblingen

Stuttgarter Str. 20

07031 Boeblingen

VAT. reg. no.GB234 933351 ka

DATE INVOICE DEBIT CREDIT BALANCE

BALANCE FORWARDED 33,705.00

Oi-Sept-20.

05-Sept-20. 7045/09/Ger 1,802.00 35,507.00

T?-Sept-20 7069/09) Ger 9200.00 44 717.00

20-Sept-20. 344.00 44,373.00

27-Sept-20., 7082/09) Ger 3,782.00 48.155.00

oO U 22x N DC

A Please transfer the amount due to your account.

B Yours sincerely,

Richard Blake

C We are enclosing our statement of your account for September, which shows a balance of

£48,155.00 In our favour.

D Dear Mrs Hasenfuss,

E We are endosing our statement of your account for September which shows a balance of

£33,705.00 in your favour.

F Please transfer the amount due to our account.

G Yours faithfully,

Richard Blake

sgramtenses 4 Second reminder

terammodals

Yay! Event Management GmbH Is an event management company with Its headquarters

in Dusseldorf. The company has recently organised a promotional campalen for Its

long-standing customer, Amperlite Ltd, 24 Harold's Cross, Dublin 6W, Ireland. Since a

previous reminder has not been answered by the client, Yay! sends this letter.

Read the letter and choose the correct alternative.

4 November 20..

Dear Mr Darty,

Our invoice no. AL‘ 20? 1-07 dated 2 September 20.

We @ to our first reminder dated 25 October 20.. and once again enclose a copy of

our statement 2 an overdue balance for the amount of €1,245.

This amount ® overdue for more than two months now and we W understand

why you (§ to settle the balance so far.

We # doing business with you for many years and 7 very sorry to lose you as our

customer.

However, we @) no choice but to ask you to arrange the settlement of the

outstanding balance by 14 November 20. at the very latest.

Kind regards,

Key Account Manager

Yay! Event Management GmbH

1. refer, do refer, referred

2. showed, showing, had shown

3. is, was, has been

4, cannot, could not, have not

5, failed, fall, have falled

6, enjoy have enjoyed, are enjoying

7. are, would be, have been

8. have, had, are having

--- Seite 42 ---

5 Final reminder e] & esha 7 Writing a reminder

reminder ; . nr

When the deadline passes without payment or a letter from the client, Yay! sends this final El =— Study the invoice and your boss's notes and write an email to Ms Elaine Greenway at

reminder. Complete the letter, using the words from the box. reminder  elalne@tfinedine...couk. Your boss is the export manager Georg Roth.

balance reference interest relationship reminders legal amicable 0)

BEETER INVONCE GAFD 2827

: Comestas-Gourmet GmbH

se OVEREREE AU. Finedine Ltd. Albert-Schweitzer-Allee 127

Dear Mr Darty, 26 Madeira Drive 22044 Hamburg

Our invoice no. AL/202 1-07 dated 2 September 20. — Germany

BN28LT Tel. (0049) 40 275 3766...

With @ to ourabove-mentioned invoice and two | sent to you in October and United Kingdom customerservicef!comestasgourmet...de

November respectively, we regret having to inform you thal the outstanding

amount of € 1.245 is still overdue.

| have repeatedly offered you the chance to communicate with me and findan 3

solution to the matter, However, we have received neither payment nor

communication from your ene.

In view of our long-standing business @ , we are herewith granting you a further

UStiD Mo, DE 233 909 621

DELIVERY ADDRESS Gf different from my. acc)

10 days in which to settle the outstanding ©. DATE OF INVOICE YOUR ORDER WO DATE OF SUPPLY TYPE OF SUPPLY

Should the inwoice not be setthed by then, we have no choice but totake (© actionto 38 Mar 20. HK 45/12 20 March 20..

enforce payment. Please be informed that, inthis event, you will also be charged

QUANTITY DESCRIPTION LIMIT PRICE TOTAL

with 7 and legal ices. 200 Gut Herlinghaus, €735 €1,470.00

| very much hope that litigation will not be necessary. Jahrgang 2010,

Riesling Kabinett, 0.7 |

Yours sincerely

Michoel Strote

Key Account Manager

Yay! Event Management GmbH M ise guter Kunde. Rechnung ist

schon mehr als 4 Wochen überfällig. Bitte

ch) erinnern Sie Ms Greenway und schicken Sle

6 Writing a first reminder eine Rechnungskopie als Anhang. al

sskill Listen to the conversation between janice Humble and jeremy Atkins in the accounts :

reminder department at Garden of Eden. Draft a letter to Gartnerel Strobel to remind them that VAT % | not applicable

payment is now overdue. Below is a copy of the relevant Invoice. tan enempit ani ra gn

ar m ; pa TERS AMOUNT DUE € 470.00

INVOICE NO. GS 13-8 Customer Ref. GSD78 30 days net

Mr Heribert Strobel Date: 4 March 20.

Gärinerei Strobel Your Order No, 255 of 5 Feb }0,

Am Schlosspark 2 oo POL: jeremy Atkins TITLE TO THE GOODS DESCRIBED ON THIS INVOICE DOES NOT PASS TO THE BUVER UNTIL THE INVOICE IS PAID IN FULL

07330 Probstzella Email: accounts@gardenofeden.,.co.uk

Germany Tek 0044 1534800 776...

QTY Description Unit Price Total

20 Acer japonicum £ 45,00 £ 900.00 8 Online research

ut Catalpa bigomioiches £ 35.00 £ 350.00 Research the following topics and report your findings in class.

TOTAL PRICE 120.0 1. What is the Late Payment Directive of the European Union?

2. What Is factoring and how does it work?

oO U 22x N DC

--- Seite 43 ---

WORKSHOP B

Replies to reminders

“basic When the customer receives a request for payment, he /she should either send the seller

reminder a letter of apology informing him/her that the amount 6 being paid or ask for an

extension of time for payment. However, a buyer who is experiencing temporary payment

difficulties should not wait until he recewes a reminder, but should contact the seller

offer to pay in instalments and ask for a respite of the remaining amount

1 Structure of a detailed reply to a reminder

a Match the different parts of a detailed reply to a reminder to the corresponding sentences

(1-9) In the letter below

apologies explanation for the delay in payment personal salutation solution suggested:

extension of due date, down payment and payment of balance at alater date, payment by

instalments reference to reminder(s) appropriate ending request for understanding

complimentary close assurance that payment will be made

Dear Ms Osborne, {i

We have received your email of 30 November conceming your statement of account

No. UK/ 140-77 (2) and would like to offer our sincere apologies for the delay in

payment. (3)

Unfortunately, three of our major customers have gone into compulsory liquidation

in the last few months due to the general decline in the domestic tourism industry.

This has obviously placed us in a somewhat precarious position. [4)

Due to these circumstances we would like to request a respite of three weeks.

Alternatively, we could pay half of the sum now and the rest in four weeks’ time. [5]

We hope you will understand our temporary predicament and see your way clear

to granting us this concession, particularly in view of our long-standing business

relations. (4

You may be sure that we will be in a position to settle the account inthe way

suggested above, as we are expecting major payments from our overseas customers

in the next few weeks. [7]

We are very sorry for the inconvenience caused and look forward to receiving your

reply. (8

Yours sincerely, [9

GW DC

b What Is the purpose of the following sentences? Match the sentences (A-G) with the

appropriate parts of a detalled reply to a reminder from exercise a.

We are expecting a considerable tax refund in the near future and this will enable us

to meet our obligations In full

Business has been slow recently and our own customers have been slow in paying their

bills.

lam extremely sorry that the due date was overlooked by our accounts department.

Much to our regret we have to ask you for an extension of credit until 31 October.

We would suggest that we pay the invoice amount in three instalments of € 7.500 each,

due 10 June, 20 june and 30 june, respectively.

Having been a customer of yours for many years | am sure that you will agree to my

proposal.

We acknowledge receipt of your letter dated 3 January reminding us that your invoice was

due on 15 December

Reactions to a reminder

Match the sentence parts and find out about possible reactions toa reminder. Note the

collocations used,

ew AM

ideally, a customer should inform the supplier A ... anew payment plan with the

in good time about any difficulties he/she may supplier.

be having in meeting ... B ... for the delay.

He/she could then ask for ... C ... concessions.

In any case, a customer should apologise ... D ...arespite.

Should your company be unable to make E ... by instalments.

payment in full, you will have to negotiate ... F ... his obligations.

In the end, each side will have to make ... G ... a down payment and pay the

The customer could make ... rest at a later date.

Or he could agree on payment ...

--- Seite 44 ---

REMih

“sklilletter 3 Writ

Schr

ing a reply to a reminder

Die Firma Acoustic Empire (Nassauring 4, 60554 Frankfurt, Tel +49 69 507 705 883...,

acousticemplre@easymail...com) hat die folgende Mahnung von Chords of Sorts

Clapham High St, London SWa 75T) erhalten. Lesen Sie den Brief und die Notizen.

elben Sie dann eine angemessene Antwort.

In our letter of 20 August, we enclosed the invoice (AEDE G- 39/4) for your order of

15 May (Your order No. 35-0513) for 20 T-Line electric bass guitars.

Step 1

fi kill

reminder

We have, however, not yet received payment of the outstanding amount of

As you have been a reliable business partner for quite a few years we must assume

that there are serious reasons for your not having remitted the above sum or

contacted us regarding your delay in payment

Please contact us as soon a5 possible io explain your reasons for withholding

payment or arrange for prompt remittance of the amount to our usual account

Step 2

Ein Brand in unserer Zentrale hat unsere gesamte EDV-Anloge zerstört und auch

wichtige Dateien vernichtet.

Durch die enorme Zusatzarbeit, die dadurch entstanden ist, war unser Personal

überlastet und konnte einige Zahlungstermine nicht einhalten.

Die Kommunikation ist jetzt wieder ungestört und wir arbeiten sehr intensiv an der

Erledigung der legengebliebenen Kundenmitteilungen und Überweisungen.

Bis Ende dieses Monats müsste der Betrag gutgeschrieben sein. Ein Rundschreiben on

alle Kunden wird in den nächsten Tagen verschickt.

I COMMON MISTAKES

. We refer to our invoice about/over amounting to € 715.20 from of 23 March.

. Our invoice about for a consignment of books is still outstanding.

. ease transfer £25.750,50 £ 25,750.50 to our account.

. The invoice was due at on 31 july.

. The account shows a balance of €65 te in our favour.

. We suppose that you must have overseen overlooked our statement of account.

7. Please settle the account und! by the end of the week

@O@uzkz OW

. The due.amount amount due has already been remitted.

‚In-thelast-time Recently we have also had problems collecting our outstanding

accounts.

. We suggest to.pay that we pay in three rates instalments of £2,000 each.

. We are, unfortunately, not in the a position to grant you the respite.

. We trust you will agree with to our suggestions.

Business scenario

Im Rahmen Ihrer Ausbildung bei der Firma Garten Fröhlich GmbH, Romerstrafie 150

63117 Heidelberg, arbeiten Sie in der Buchhaltung. Garten Fröhlich vertreibt eine große

Auswahl an Gartenzubehör. Vor fünf Wochen wurden Artikel im Wert von €12.500 an

Rosegardens Ltd, 5 St. james St. Brighton BN2 IRE, England, geliefert. Es wurde verein

bart, dass die Bezahlung per Banküberweisung innerhalb von 30 Tagen mit einem Pree

nachiass von 2% erfolgen sollte. Bis jetzt ist keine Zahlung eingegangen

Ihre Vorgesetzte, Kirsten Hack, muss heute das Büro früher verlassen, Sie bittet Sie, eine

Mahnung an die Firma zu schreiben und dabei ihre Hinweise in der Mail zu berücksichtigen.

Hallo ...,

Ich muss heute etwas früher gehen. Könnten Sie bitte eine freundliche Mahnung an die

Firma Rosegardens mit den folgenden Angaben schicken. Kontakt Ist Frau Bors Daisy

(daisy @rosegardens...com), Unterschreiben Sie ak mein/+# Assistent/-in.

- Bezug auf Lieferung vor 5 Wochen, Auftragsnummer RoGa 4711

- Freundliche Zahlungserinnerung, verweisen Sie auf das Zahlungsdatum

- Köpie der offenen Rechnung uber 12.500 € beifügen

Danke.

Kirsten Hack

Zwei Wochen später ist Immer

noch keine Zahlung eingegan-

vor ? Wochen und

gen. Die Firma hat sich auch Bezugnahme auf Rechnung von

nicht gemeldet. Frau Hack bittet 1. Mahnung h

weder gemeldet noc

Sie eine zweite Mahnung per - bisher hat sich die Firma ge

E-Mail zu schicken. Sie finden gezohit

dazu eine Notiz von Ihr auf Ihrem setzen Sie eine letzte Frist in 2 Wochen ab heute

Schreibtisch,

Heute erreicht Sie der folgende Anruf. Erstellen Sie eine Gesprachsnotiz auf Deutsch für Frau

Hack, die momentan in einer Besprechung ist und den Anruf nicht entgegennehmen kann.

Garten Fröhlich GmbH

Guten Tag. Garten Fröhlich GmbH. Mein Name ist ...

Mr Wiffen |

I'm sorry, she's in a meeting right now. Can I help you?

I'm sorry to hear that. Sorry, what was your name?

Okay, thanks, ve got that. And you are calling from Rosegardens, is that correct?

Okay, let me just get the file. And you say that the invoice has already been paid?

Well, we must have made a mistake somewhere. | have written down all the

details for Ms Hack. I'm sure she'll be able to clear the matter up when she calls

you back this afternoon. Will you be available?

Okay. Could I have the number, please?

Good, I've got that She'll call you back later to tell you what's happened.

You're welcome, Goodbye

--- Seite 45 ---

REMINDERS

Review Exam practice

Before you test yourself in Exom proctice, take a few moments to reflect on what you

have just learned. Then make a follow-up plan: What do you need to improve before the

1 Sprachergänzungstest (Bearbeitungszeit ca. 10 Minuten)

final exam? How will you go about petting there? You ancheck again after Exam practice Setzen Sie 20 der 23 angegebenen Wörter in die Lücken des Textes ein.

accept already always continuing deadline deliver extension good heard

important invoice issued mistakes overdue payment punctually receive reminded

satisfied shows twice why within

abasic In this unit, you have learned how to ...

reminder write first, second and final reminders by email or letter | use the appropriate style for

BBBBBBBE

a reminder | write a reply to a reminder

1 Considering these topics and tasks, ask yourself:

Vocabulary Do | know the relevant words and phrases needed to ...

DearMr Hansen

reminder write first, second and final reminders by email or letter | write replies to

reminders? Invoice no. 455/UK/27 0f 17 January 20..

Can I understand and use these relevant words and phrases confidently in On 5 January you placed an order with us forspare parts for mountain bikes, Your

speaking and in writing? signature on the Delivery Note @ bythe forwarder 2 us that you received the

Can | adapt my language to the medium / channel | use (letter, email, phone)? spare parts in # condition on 22 January The # was due for & on 14 February

wen = 5 and has now been  forthree weeks.

ls ni Grammar et speaking, did | come across a common source © We are wondering #7 we have not |® from you, especially as you |# settled your

Er f c- N 7 Er ; 2

sgramtenses If so, what was it and how can I practise and improve in this particular area? accounts # in the past. Of course, we understand that ™ happen and sometimes

ser ammodals

Do | know how to use the relevant prepositions?

payments are overlooked, However, itis @ thatwe @ your payment 14 10 days. If

you cannot meet this ® ‚please call me directly on # 357. lfvour remittance is @

skill Writing Do | know how to structure a reminder? onits way, please WW my apologies for this reminder.

reminder I hope you are # with the spare parts and look forwardto #8 ourexcellent

eskillletier Do | know how to structure a reply to a reminder? Pe} pare pa

business relations.

askillemall What do I need to consider when writing a first, second and final reminder? .

Yours sincerely,

What are common mistakes regarding prepositions? Hartfield Bikes Ltd

skill ‘

phonecall Speaking Can | talk on the phone about late payments and the associated problems? Jans Rogers

Methods / Do | know how to use prepositions and phrases correctly!

Strategies Jane Rogers

2 Use your answers from 1 to create a learning and revision plan.

WHAT? HOW? WHEN?

What do | need to work ont What will | do to improve? When do I want to complete

this?

ı There are hardly any definite rules as to when to use which preposition. The best way

ı to leam them is by practice, practice, practice. Do not translate. Try to memorise full

| expressions and have a look at the box “COMMON MISTAKES” When in doubt: look

' them up.

oO U 22x N DC

Credit Control

--- Seite 46 ---
~~, fio

2 Kurz gefasste schriftliche Mitteilung (Bearbeitungszeit 30 Minuten) 3 Geschäftsbrief nach Stichworten (Bearbeitungszeit 45 Minuten)

Sie sind Sachbearbeiter/-in in der Rechnungsabtellung der Spielzeugfirma Kinderparadies Sie arbeiten im letzten Jahr ihrer Berufsausbildung in der Rechnungsabte lung von The Bike

in Ulm. Ihre Firma hat den beillegenden Brief von der britischen Firma SuperTeddys Ltd Factory Europe GmbH, Zwickauer Str. 14-18, 04129 Leipzig, schon elgernwerantwoörtlich.

erhalten. Ihr Chef, Christian Mulgg, hat Ihnen den Brief zur Beantwortung gegeben und Die Irische Firma Kerry Holidays LTD, 32 The Esplanade, Belfast AY1 33D, Nordirland, hat bei

folgende Notiz daran geheftet ihnen am 26, März 20. eine eillge Bestellung für 120 Fahrradhelme (Order Nr: DE 342-33)

zum Einkaufspreis von €3845,50 platziert. Nachdem von Kerry Holidays LTD. eine Anzahlung

von €1000,00 geleistet wurde, Ist die Ware gellefert worden. Laut Rechnung Nr. 210345 vom

Bitte schicken Sie in Ihrem Nomen eine E-Mail (j kamilton @superteddys...co.uk) zurück 2. April 20.. war der Restbetrag 10 Tage nach Warenerhalt fälle. Heute Ist der 25. April 20.

und unterschreiben Sie selbst. Erwdhnen Sie folgende Punkte und ihrem Firmenkonto ist der Betrag noch nicht gutgeschrieben worden.

-— Vielen Donk, doss Sie uns rechtzeitig auf Ihre finanziellen Probleme aufmerksam

gemocht haben

— Selbstverstdadlich können wir den Zahlungstermin um 2 Wochen aufschieben. Wir Mahnen Sie in einem Erinnerungsschreiben die ausstehende Summe an und beachten Sie

wissen es zu schötzen, dass Sie Rechnungen immer pünktlich begleichen dabei die folgenden Punkte

— Wir hoffen, dass die finanziellen Probleme Ihrer wichtigen Kunden inzwischen gelöst — Bezug auf den Auftrag vom ..

worden sind - Anfrage, ob die Sendung pünktlich gewesen und ohne Beanstandung ist

- Natürlich freuen wir uns auf Ihren nächsten Auftrag und fügen eine Broschüre zu — Kopie der offenen Rechnung beifügen

einigen neuen Produkten bei -— Vermeisen Sie auf das Fälligkeitsdatum

= Vielen Dank! - ‚Zahlung per Banküberweisung auf Ihr Konto: DES6 4930 1220 0000 2324 25,

BIC WSARO#ZR, bei der Sächsischen Handelsbank noch ausstehend

- Bitte Brief als gegenstandslos beachten, sollte die Zahlung bereits erfolgt sein

= Angemessener Schluss

Kinderparadies Super Teddys Ltd

Herm Christian Muigg 37 The Level

Regensburger Str. Tunbridge Wells

59073 Ulm Kent TN3 4P%

GERMANY UK

3 ume 20.

Dear Mr Muigg,

Your Invoice No. A7-3258 due 18 June 20..

| am writing to you before the above invoice is due as we may have difficulty

settling it within the agreed timeframe.

lamafraid that acouple of our important customers have been in financial

difficulties, and we have been forced to grant them respite. It seems that their

financial situation is now improving.

However, to be onthe safe side, | would like to ask you to allow us to postpone

settlement of the above invoice by two weeks, ic. to | July 20. .1 am very reluctant

to ask this favour of you. We have always plac el great value on settling Invoices on

time

Thank you for your understanding.

Yours sincerely,

Jonathan Hamilton

Jonathan Hamilton

Sales Manager

oO U2LZVr WDC < ser > @

--- Seite 47 ---

Organisational communication

Organisational communication is an essential part of working In AOMINnStration making

AD RO Inte nts, COmMMmuUNnIcatineg Bere dl inmormation and coordinating Arrangements are

2) ame MAKING a | ust afew ofa wide range of possible task

ARRANGEMENTS Ley 1 aranging company vis

Tom Schmitt, Sales Manager at The Bike Factory headquarters in Frankfurt, has found a

potential new customer, Ruben Paterson, Head Buyer at DutchBikes in Amsterdam.

Mr Paterson would like to see the company’s premises and have an initial meeting with Tom.

Tom's assistant, Sarah Hofmann, receves a phone call from Mr Paterson's assistant,

Britt Janssen. She wants to arrange the meeting.

meetings

eskillmemo AS Sarah, take notes while you are listening and write a memo in German for Tom

dated 1 October 20.

Sarah Britt

Good afternoon, Sarah Hofmann, how can | help?

Hello Ms Janssen, how are you?

I'm fine too, thanks. Sure - | guess you are calling about Mr Paterson's visit. | saw in

Mr Schmitt's inbox that he has arranged a meeting with him in two weeks’ time

Correct, he's asked Mr Paterson to join him for lunch and then take a look at the

manufacturing site. lim just checking his diary ... he's put a blocker in for himself, but

Il send over an invitation for Mr Paterson toa,

making

| workshop me Oh yeah, that should be no problem. Although ... tm not sure if they're ready yet, |

arrangements

hear there have been problems with the delivery of some of the components. I'll check

with Mr Schmitt

he international travel business meeting Hm, again I'm not so sure. | guess it'll be no more than two hours but rll ask Mr Schmitt

a and then get back to you. Regarding travel arrangements: can | ask, where will

— = Mr Paterson be travelling from?

Yes, of course, no problem. |1l book him in as a visitor and arrange a parking space for

him in the visitors’ bay. M1 just need you to let me know the registration and the model

of his car, please

That'd be perfect, thanks. In fact, if you could also confirm his email address, then I can

arrange internet access for him as well,

While I have you on the phone - does Mr Paterson have any special dietary

requirements for the lunch?

OK, no problem, I'll tell Mr Schmitt to choose a restaurant that has good vegan options. | ...

You're welcome. So Il send over an invitation and the map shortly and I'll arrange

3 | ao | a parking space and internet access once you've sent me his details. And if there's

anything else in the meantime, just drop me a line

‘| What experience do you have in making arrangements? Think of an example of something orte Tile cared

you have organised (e.g.a party, a trip or an event at your sports club) and teil your partner

about it.

5) #basic 2 Create a word web about making arrangements in business. Choose an event, e.g. a supplier

arrangements meeting or a sales pitch. What needs to be organised? Which companies are involved and

who are the points of contact?

oO U 22x N DC

--- Seite 48 ---
MAKING ARRANGEMENTS

#skillemaill 2

arrangements

@O@uzkz OW

Making appointments

In a team meeting, Tom Schmitt wants to

discuss the company’s Involvement at the

Sports Travel Fair in London. Since Miles

Davies, Sales Manager at The Bike Factory's

Cambridge office, will also be attending

the fair, Tom would like Miles to join the

planning meeting.

invitations

#akillemail

Read the email from Miles to Tom and the

Instructions Tom forwarded to his assistant,

Sarah, Then write Tom's reply to Miles.

From: mudavies@thebikefactory ...uk ry

To: tschmittee thebikefactory ...de

CC: shofmanng thebkefactory...de

Subiect: Sports Travel Fair Meeting arrangements

HI Tom,

Thanks for inviting us to the meeting, We would be very pleased to attend. kt will give us the

OPPOrtunity To dhscuss matters such as planning and Coordination, logstics, opucs, budget,

who 00 Invite and which products to promote, Working together from the start will be grearly

beneficial | am sure.

Unfortunately, neither of the dates you suggested are suitable a5 | have important meetings on

both of those days, What about the week before or after? Would 24 November or 15 December

work for you, for example?

Also, should we organise our own travel arrangements?! if so, can you recommend a good hotel

near our headquarters? | assume we will be meeting there

Perhaps we can have dinner together the evening before the meeting? Would you be able to

book a Suitable place for us to 80 "There will be six of us Coming from Cambridge

Invitations

Team meetings often require no more than an informal invitation via email Invitations

to other teats, oompankes and customers, on the other hand, should be well thought out

to ensure they contain all the necessary information for all participants. For particularly

formal occasions, invitations should be sent by letter

‘| Meeting invitations

Miles and Tom found a sultable date for all attendees. Complete the invitation. There are

3 more words than you need,

arranged attending coming up concerning confirmation delighted happy hold

jointly lead request travelarrangements warmly

From s.hofmann@thebketactory. . de a

To: The Bike Factory Cambridge

CC: | rorresgptheblkefactory... .uk

Subject: Meeting invitation 24 November

Dear colleagues,

As you all know, the Sports Travel Fair is 9 in March 20.. As teams from both the headquarters

in Frankfurt and the offices in Cambridge willbe (2) the fair, Tom and Miles would like to handle

Preparations & .

Therefore, we would be 4 to invine You to a joint preparatory meeting in Frankfurt on

24 November 20_, starting at 8am. Tom and Miles will § the meeting.

© willbe organised by your assistant, jane. She will be glad to help you with any questions 7

routes, timings etc

Accommodation will be © for you at the Red Box Business Hotel in Frankfurt.

Upon your arrival on 23 November, you are 9 invited to dinner at the Asian Fusion restaurant

at 6pm.

All the best, We look forward to recewing | of your attendance.

Miles ¥

All thee best,

Sarah Hofmann, Team Assistant

The Bike Factory Frankfurt ¥

= 15.12. geht nicht (wichtiger Termin),

also nehmen wir den 24.11 5] u u

- sollen Anreise selbst organisieren sskillietter 2 Inviting visitors to a trade fair

(5 Minuten entfernt, guter Service)

- Datum und Uhrzeit der An- und Abreise?

- Abendessen am Anreisetag im Asian Fusion - OKF

- kann Red Box Business Hotel in Frankfurt empfehlen BRD tate

Important (potentia) commercial partners and customers should be personally Invited to

visit a company’s booth or stand at a fair. This is a great opportunity to stand out fromthe

competition,

a Use 20 of the following 23 words to complete the Invitation on the next page

admission build combining contact design displayed entirely exhibition first

happy food introducing invite main of opportunity pattem range reason

specialise stand visit well

--- Seite 49 ---
WORKSHOP B MAKING ARRANGEMENTS

Universal Box plc

Markgraf von der Lausitz-Allee 27

91003 Leipzig

Tel, +49 171 39200 50

k.stauder@universalbox..de

www.universalbox...com

02 January 20.

Dear ...,

Invitation: Packaging Design Fair in Mumbai

The Packaging Design Fair, where you are certain to find the latest designs in

packagingas 1 as many other useful ideas, opens on 16 March in Mumbai.

Asyouknow,we 2 inpackaging designforuseinthe 3 and beauty industries,

This year weare 4 our new ECO § of recyclable plastic packaging solutions,

which willbe ¢ forthe 7 time in Mumbai. Forthis # , we would liketo personally

# youto #% our specialdisplayat 1 17, in hall 3, nearthe 12 entrance.

With ECO we have created an 13 new concept # expert craftmanship and state-

of-the-art % . We hope you will not miss the ® to see our new range for yourself.

We will be more than @ to offer you two complimentary # tickets for the

packaging fair if you # us within four weeks 2 receiving this invitation.

We look forward to welcoming you at the fair.

Best wishes,

Universal Box pic

Katrin Stauder

for Martina Hegewald

Key Account Manager

eskililetter b As Sarah Hofmann (Team Assistant, The Bike Factory Frankfurt, Mainallee 123, 60306 Frank-

furt), write a letter to Ruben Paterson (Head Buyer at DutchBikes, Schipperstraat 12-11,

© 1011 BB Amsterdam, NL), inviting him to visit The Bike Factory's stand at the Sports Travel

Meetings

ea kill

Fair. Consider these notes from your supervisor (Tom Schmitt, Sales Manager). phonecall

phonecall

travel

-— Sports Travel Fair, Exhibition Centre London (ExCeL)

- 3-5March 20

- Qutdoor-Areal, Segment A4 Bike tours & Cycling vacations,

Standnummer A4- 129

- stellen unsere aktuelle Bikepocking-Linie aus: Cyclocross Bikes, Mountain Bikes und

Touring Bikes, speziell hergestellt für längere Bikepocking-Touren; Bikepacking

Accessoires (Taschen, Berg- und Campingequipment, Reparatursets u.v.m.)

— Tiekets verfügbar für Herrn Poterson und 3 weitere Vertreter/-innen,

bei Anfroge vor dem 15.01

- unterschreiben Sie in meinem Namen

oO U 22x N DC

Travel and bookings

Organising business tips often consists of hiring cars and booking tickets, hotels and

exhibition stands. Although most of the DOOKINES Gin be done online, personal

COMMUNICATION is sometimes still necessary e.g. when dealing with amendments,

CANCELLATIONS, or indmwidual requests

1 Individual requests

Melek Kaya from XYZ Travel Is preparing to attend a tourism falr in Edinburgh.

Complete her email to Skye Hotel, Edinburgh.

at could could not during haveto on may to would(2=) wouldliketo would need

From: Melek Kaya F

To: Skye Hotel Edinburgh

Date: 5 April 20...

Subject: Room reservation

Dear Sir or Madam,

I ME feserve a room for three nights Including breakfast from 29 April to 2 May.

Untorunarely! a find a way to outline my specific requests «2 the online booking form, $0 |

am including them in this email instead. As | arive © 7am, (8 an early check-in, if that is

possible. Also, I amallergic (@ dust mites so | would need one of your allergy-friendiy rooms (as

advertised on your website). | wil probably 7 do some work # my stay sol ® need a desk

18 that be possible?

Iwill be arriving on flight BA 542, which lands at 5:45 pm on 29 April I you please arrange for

an airport transfer?

Please #2 you confinm the booking? Let me know if you need any further information at all

Many thanks

Kind regards,

Melek Kaya T

2 Cancelling a hotel reservation

The tourism fair in Edinburgh has been moved to another exhibition centre. Melek Kaya

needs to cancel her booking with the Skye Hotel since It Is too far from the fair’s new

location. With a partner, act out the conversation between Melek and the hotel receptionist.

+ Role card B, p. 121

Role card A- Melek Kaya

* Sie arbeiten für das Unternehmen XYZ Travel in Berlin. Sie rufen im Skye Hotel in Edinburgh

an. Sie haben für sich selbst ein Einzelzimmer vom 29. April bis zum 02. Mai gebucht. Die

Konferenz, an der Sie teilnehmen werden, wurde in einen weiter entfernten Stadtteil verlegt,

weshalb Sie die Buchung stornieren müssen

» Sie möchten wissen, ob die bereits geleistete Anzahlung zurückerstattet wird und ob für die

Stomierung eine Extragebühr erhoben wird.

» Sie möchten keinen Gutschein, sondern eine Rückerstattung

« Bedanken Sie sich und beenden Sie das Gespräch.

--- Seite 50 ---
WORKSHOPC | MAKING ARRANGEMENTS

3 Booking an exhibition stand

Katrin Stauder is Team Assistant at the Leipzig-based subsidiary of Universal Box pic, which

has similar subsidiaries In other European countries. The company’s head office is in

Stockholm, Sweden, and the company language is English. Katrin’s boss has asked her to

arrange the company's participation at the Packaging Design Fair in Mumbai, India.

a Katrin calls Indira Chaudhary from the Mumbal Fairs Authority.

Act out the phone conversation with a partner. + Role card B, p. 121

exhibitions

Role card A - Katrin Stauder

« Begrüßen Sie Frau Chaudhary und stellen Sie sich und Ihr Anliegen kurz vor:

Sie arbeiten für das Unternehmen Universal Box plc in Leipzig. Sie haben für Ihr

Unternehmen wor 3 Wochen einen Stand gebucht und noch keine Bestätigung bekommen.

Sie möchten den Status der Reservierung jetzt prüfen

« Bedanken Sie sich für die Auskunft. Bitten Sie um eine Bestätigung per Mail

« Nennen Sie Ihre Mailadresse:

k.stauderg@universalbox...de,

= Bedanken und verabschieden Sie ach

b Katrin calls her counterpart, Angélique Villeneuve, in French-speaking Switzerland.

Listen to their conversation. Take the role of Angélique (email address: a.villeneuveguniver-

salbox...ch) and write an email to Katrin, giving her all the necessary information:

- flieht number and time (flight number EK 048 arrives in Mumbai 5:45 pm local time)

- requires non-smoking room and vegetarian breakfast

- transport from airport and from hotel to exhibition centre?

4, Making hotel reservations for the fair

After having talked to Angélique, Katrin from Universal Box pic calls the Grand Mogul Palace

Hotel in Mumbal. Rajlv Singh takes her call

a Listen to the telephone conversation and take notes.

b Take the role of Katrin Stauder and send an email to Anna Parkanova (a.parkanowaguniver-

salbox...sk) in Bratislava informing her about the hotel arrangements, vegetarian options

available etc. Ask her to book flights for her company executives and to confirm the details

by email. The executives should amive by 5pm on 16 March

karten

oO U 22x N DC

»skiliemail 5 Hiring a rental car

travel Martina Cantillina is a trainee at Genshuber Maschinenbau GmbH In Bernau. Her supervisor

is Olaf Brunner. She has just received a confirmation email from the rental car agency Car

Hire Dublin, through which she has hired a car for Mr Brunner trip to Dublin iin a few weeks.

Considering Mr Brunner’s notes, write her reply to the agency.

From: bookinagpcarh iredublin...ie ä

To: cantillinag genabernau...de

CC: brunnergeemaäbernau...de

Date: 05 August 20.

Subject: Car Hire Booking Confirmation

Dear Ms Cantillina,

Thank you for choosing to book your car using vemmww.carhiredublin....he

Your booking detail are as follows:

Vehicle details Confirmation number: 12345789

Vehicle: Group C Insurance policy number: 123454BC6789

Offer includes: 5 doors, 5 seats Price details

Automatic Rental period € 314,44

Unlimited free Kilometres (2 days x €1572)

Theft protection Protection & extras eo

Registration fee Total E314.44

Pick-up details Drop-off details

Branch: Dublin City Centre Branch: Dublin Airport

Address: Dublin Car Hire House, Address: Dublin Car Hire Airport,

1734 Main Street, Dublin 1234 Airport Street, Dublin

Phone: +353 12345678 Phone: 435318765 432

Date: Monday, 17 August 20. Date: Wednesday, 19 August 20.

Time: 9am Time: 7am

Client to pay on arrival with credit card.

Please contact bookinggcarhinedublin,..ie you have any questions regarding this booking ¥

- brauche Wagen erst om nächsten Tag, dafür 3 Tage länger

(hänge privaten Termin on den Besuch in Dublin an) — Preis?

- brauche größeren Kofferraum

- Wogen om Flughafen abholen, nicht im Stadtzentrum - OK?

- Möglichkeit, vor den offiziellen Öffnungszeiten Wagen abzugeben?

- wollgetonkt zurückgeben?

--- Seite 51 ---

WORKSHOP C MAKING ARRANGEMENTS MAKING ARR

#skittemail 6 Flight bookings Business scenario

travel a Olaf Brunner Is planning to fly from Zurich to London fora Meeting With er Leigh from 5] u You work for XYZ Travel. Your company i hosting a conference in your city and has invited

Cumbria Steel pic (email address: clei gh@cumibria... Uk). Study the Ps from the conferences international commerial partners and Potential customers to take part. Your SU Pervisof,

eee timetable and the ticket, a5 well a5 Mr Brunner’s notes to Martina Cantillina, the trainee : ston

ines Müller, has asked you to make arrangements for two important customers

(cantillinag@egemabernau...de). Write Martina’s email

=e u Read the emall from Steve Holmes, Key Account Manager at XYZ Travel Global, a subsidiary

in the US, and the profiles of the international visitors. Note relevant keywords and write a

= ihe hi ' : 3 basi:

a eet repeen ire OF >] arrengements memo in German for your supervisor, Ines. Date: 28 july 20.

Mr Leigh

- nehme Tox! vom Flughalen London

Heathrow zum Hotel The Londoner

- Treffen in Hotellobby um 12 Uhr —

gemeinsames Mittagessen?

Dear Ines,

Thanks for taking care of our most important clients. | just wanted to give you afew

more details to help you make your suggestions, so I have included a brief profile of

Ms Adebisi and Mr Hasebe below. The conference schedule finishes on Friday after-

noon at 4pm and the guests are staying until Saturday. It is important that any

activities are completed by around 5:30 pm on Saturday as Ms Adebisi needs to be

back al the airport by 7 pm. Although we want to make their stay as special as

possible, we do have a budget. | have been told that you will have around € 1,200 to

Olaf Brunner IX316 37A 20Aug OlafBrunner = play with, so see if you can make that work.

lam look ing forward to seeing what you come up with.

ZURICH; LONDON/ 07:30 415 a i -— Lt 316 Regards,

ZRH LHR Steve Holmes

| sense re ers esserene IM I) — — SE Ms Nikki Adebisi, South Africa Mr Takashi Hasebe, Japan

(Purchasing Executive, African Adventure Tours) (CEO, Nagoya Smart City Project)

2 b Mr Brunner’s return flight was cancelled at short notice. He asked Martina to call the airline . nee rer seen . a. De ee re

skilimemoe and figure out his options. Listen to the conversation (date: 21 August). As Martina, write a - needs a gift for her teenage daughter - has only been to Germany once before

memo for Mr Brunner. - wanes to see the real Germany’ - not very sporty

ial] Martina : Daniel

Hello there, my name is Martina Cantillina, I'm calling from Genshuber Maschinen- |

bau on behalf of my boss - he had a flight from London to Zunch booked for ı

tomorow evening but he’s just called and told me that it's been cancelled! | hin nee a ago a EC eee See ee

Please can you confinn the status of the flight? 4] #basic y ve iii

H arrangements

Yes, it's Olaf Brunner and the flight was LX 327 from London Heathrow to Zurich,

departing at 6:40 pm

Oh, | see. OK. What options do we have for rebooking?

No, that won't work, he has an important meeting that day starting at 9:00am. = step 3 } Write an email to the - Mail in meinem Namen an Nikki Adebisi (adebisi@aat...za)

He really needs to fly back tomorrow evening. Is there nothing else available? 4] may S008 informing them und Tokashi Hasebe (hasebs@smarteity... jo), mich in CC

ı ask x 2

Today ... hmm. I'm not sure - I'll need to speak to Mr Brunner and check withhim. = .. a of the final plans (mueller@xy ztravel...de)

I'l give you acall back once I've got in touch with him. That's our only option, if fve (your email address: - freuen uns auf ihren Besuch und unser Kennenlernen

understood correctly? yournamegpxyztravel . . .de). - erkläre, welche Freizeitaktivitäten wir für ihren Aufenthalt

Alright. Thanks for your help. I'll speak to Mr Brunner right away and let you know. Consider these notes geplant haben — alle einverstanden?

Goodbye from your boss, Ines. - Catering und Restaurants: Allergien, Ernährungsweisen?®

—Konferenzpion anhängen

— bei Fragen an dich wenden

--- Seite 52 ---

MAKING ARRANGEMENTS

Review Exam practice

Before you test yourself in Exam practice, take a few moments to reflect on what you Mündliche Prüfung: Telefongespräch (Dauer ca. 20 Minuten)

have just learned. Then make a follow-up plan: What do you need to improve before the

final exam? How will you go about getting there? You can check again after Exam practice Üben Sie gemeinsam mit einem Partner / einer Partnerin.

Tauschen Sie nach einem Durchgang die Rollen

#basic In this uni have learned how to ... i in):

capa mark general EE | NR SE ay rene Te RS A ES | Sy Jeripacntioxemelaep bel der Firma Astroelobe GmbH in Meissen. Die Leiterin Ihrer

=] book hotels, flights etc. | book an exhibition stand zt baba shire

Abtellung, Annette Pollnow, wird nächste Woche einen Geschäftspartner in Hongkong

besuchen. Da sie heute noch ein wichtiges Meeting hat, hat sie Ihnen folgende E-Mail

1 Considering these topics and tasks, ask yourself: geschickt. — Role card B, p. 1217

Vocabulary Do | know the relevant words and phrases needed to ...

4] meetings arrange meetings | book hotels, flights etc. | organise and book an hal a

exhibitions exhibition stand | write invitations | pass on general information? ERDRT ..

Can | understand and use these relevant words and phrases confidently in bitte rufen Sie die Assistentin von Wong Lee Instruments in Hongkong an und teilen ihr die

>] conferences speaking and in writing? Einzelheiten über meinen Besuch nächste Woche mit

travel ees Bine fragen Sie nach dem Namen des Leiters der Forschungsabteilung, mit dem ich mich am

email Can | adapt my language to the medium / channel | use (letter, email, phone) Mittwoch treffen werde und lassen Sie sich den Namen buchstableren. Bitte fragen Sie auch

5] and the addressee (boss, colleague, stranger, someone | know ...)? nach, wie lange die Besprechung mit Hern Wu-Dzlo am Donnerstag dauern wird und ob ich

; : noch Zeit für eine Stadtrundfahrt einplanen kann

sgramtenses Grammar When writing and ba speaking, did | come across a common source of ich hätte auch gem gewusst, ob es möglich Ist, dass mich jemand vom Flughafen abholt

>] "eram grammar mistakes? Ich hänge Ihnen meinen Terminplan als Excel-Datei an

prepasitions If so, what was it and how can | practise and improve in this particular area?

Vielen Dank

5] #skillemall Writing Do | know how to structure a formal letter / email? Annette Polinow

= What do | need to consider when writing a business letter email, e.g. an

invitation or a stand booking? AAN

What do I need to consider when writing a memo, e.g. about arranging a 20 Mittwoch a Donnerstag

—— company visit? 08.00 Ankunft Hongkong 0.00 Treffen mit Mr Wu-Dziao

=| What do | need to consider when passing on general information like a 822, LH 3%

change of address? 71.00 Treffen mit Mr (N), 1.00 Rückflug 18.12 nach

skill Speaking Can | confidently express my concems over the phone when it comes to Forschung sabteilung Frankfurt, LH 320

>] phonecall meetings and bookings, e.g. confirmations and cancellations? 14.00 Besichtigung der Labors

eskllimema Methods / Do I know how to distinguish relevant information from irrelevant von Wong Lee

Strategies information, e.g. when taking notes during a phone call? 46.00 Besuchder neuen

Ausbildungsakademie

2 Use your answers from 1t0 create a learning and revision plan. 19.00 Essen mit Isabel Sing

WHAT? HOW? WHEN? v

What do | need to work on? What will | do to improve? When do | want to

complete this?

Watching series, reading books and listening to podcasts in English can greatly improve

your understanding of the English language. Try to make it a habit if you want to work on

| your general language skills,

OO UL2 Lo N DC | 108/109

--- Seite 53 ---
=. aie

job advertisements

job advertisements provide hints about what an employer is looking for in the ideal

Candidate. You can often take the words and Dhrases used ın an advertisement and reise

5 APPLICATIONS en

1 Parts of a job advertisement

a Read the following advertisement. Match the different parts of a job advertisement to the

corresponding sections (1-6)

summary of company androle position salary and working hours benefits application

requirements and contact details skills and requirements

IT Customer Support Officer |1] A

AS an e-commerce company with clients worldwide, we are on

the lookout for an IT Customer Support Officer to assist our

customers with any technical challenges they may have. [2]

We are interested in English speakers with great

communication skills and excellent knowedee of a range

of e-commerce sofmware and administration programmes.

ideally you will have studied IT and have some experience

working within the field. [3]

We offer fined weekly working hours and an initial starting salary of €22,000 per annum. [4

We place high value on a great working environment: you will work in bright, airy offices with

access tO 3 Subsidised company catereria. [#]

if this sounds like your next mle. please submit a CV and cover letter to jobsgbkAinfo_.de by

31 july 20... [a] ¥

b Complete the job advertisement with the phrases from the box.

into practice documentation personnel efficiently as and when shifts hourly rate

member interpersonal manage processing and coordination organised

Logistics Coordinator z F

We are look line for a OynaMmic new oF of our logistics team fQ)

to assist with the 2 of international customer orders. Pur x

1 Knowing and understanding your skills, strengths and weaknesses Is essential to finding the your knowledge # and take che lead in helpingto 4 | é 4

right job and convincing an employer to hire you. What are your key competencies? the warehouse and exports! PN sas

Share your ideas with a partner. Then make a list of the points you would wish to bring to the You should be able to work IE and independently and sia

attention of a potential employer in a job application. have excellent communication and I" skills. At the same cH

time, you should be highly 7 and proactive in solving = at a

2 There are often several stages involved in a recrultment process, each of which might involve en = they arise. You will also be responsible for

different documents from both the applicant and the employer. Brainstorm the stages of a prime tree

Our logistics i work SH totalling between 15 and 40 hours

job application. For each one, take brief notes on what happens, who Is involved and which per week, they are paid an if! of €13,50

documents might be provided from each party.

s vn. Please send your application to a-zZlogistics@..de by midnight on 21 October 20_. ¥

O©r2z2¢0n70C I

--- Seite 54 ---

Application documents ıgram b Read the following extract from a cover letter Complete the gaps with the correct

prepositions

| "basic A CV is almost always required as part of a job application. When applying for a job in preposition.

applications Eneti En ee u - oon | F 4

nelish, it is important to be aware of the differences between a Gennan Lebenslauf and ia f .

' at(2x) as(2x) with in@x to

an English CV

1 German Lebensiauf vs. English CV

Read the short text about writing a CV in English. Then explain to a partner: What would you

do differently when compiling a CV for a German or English employer? I studied Business Management © Freiburg Vocational College and graduated in

2014. During my studies, | also completed a six-month internship © abankclerk,

Tryto keep your CY brief and concise-one  Whenapplying for a job inthe UK, you where | supported the bank manager # administrative tasks. IM

age if possible, or no more than two. Make 1 should not include a photo or your marital n

P 5 pos Seen 5 = 5 ph ir ’ Since completing my studies, [have been working # asecrelary ©) a small private

sure to write down your work experience, status and you do mot need to sign your Lies fie BR Sealife ‘Thike has enchlbil aun th cake dhiksidarabinedoniance Mi the

education and qualifications in reverse name at the end. You also donot necessarily he a ee rasen ’

= ae legal sector and improve my organisation and office communications skills, [2]

s chronological order and include any skills need to give a testimonial —ifanemployer

and interests which are relevant tothe job, wants references, they will ask you forthese | am looking for a position in which | can develop the skills and expertise | have

Alterany German terms (e.g. qualifications 15 separately. gained so far. | am particularly interested ® working for your company because of

of job titles) into English equivalents. its long-standing knowledge and expertise in corporate and business law. | am also

attracted # its positive and friendly working almosphere. [3]

2 Putting together a CV

#skillev a Listen carefully and take notes about:

1. points to include in a CV c Match the parts of a cover letter to the corresponding sections In the extract above (1-3).

2. education details

3. work experience details vision of future role education and training work experience

#skillmemo 4, skills

b Write a memo in German about the structure and contents of an English CV. fay d Look back at the example job advertisements on page 111 or go online and look fora

position which interests you. Using the template and the previous exercises, write a cover

c Use the template and your notes from the previous exercise to create your own CV. letter for the job.

sskill 3 Writing a cover letter

coverletter A cover letter accompanies a CV and gives you the chance to explain to the employer in more

detall why you are interested in the company and the position, and why you are suitable for

"gramtenses a The following sentences might be used In a cover letter. Complete the sentences with the

correct conjugation of the words and phrases from the box. There are two more than you

need

EI EEEBBE

to have to be interestedin towork tolookfor tobe to develop todo to graduate

to play toget tojoin

| @ a hard-working, reliable and motivated individual.

. | 8 a position in which! can @) my communication skills.

‚1 working for your company because it is innovative and forward-thinking.

. Currently | ® an apprenticeship in bookkeeping.

. | @ previous work experience as a sales assistant.

. After leaving school, I m a part-time job at a bakery.

. | ®) for a small travel agency for the past eighteen months.

. 1 8 from college with a qualification in business administration.

FL Win

@Oueze OW dC | 112/113

--- Seite 55 ---

APPLICATIONS

Interviews

3 Interview questions

a Goonline and search for the top 10 most common interview questions. Take notes and write

down ideas about how you would answer the questions.

Whether an interview takes place on the phone, online or in person, it is important to

prepare well for it in advance. While this may differ slightly depending on whether itl

be a traditional or virtual meeting, the Structure of an interview & penerally standard

eskill “| Structure of a job interview

Interlan ,

a Look at the following elements of a job interview. Arrange each one into the correct category

of the table to say who Is responsible for it: the interviewer, the candidate, or both.

seram 6 In a job interview, a candidate is asked about their streneths. Read the response and identify

adjectives the adjectives and adverbs.

fgramadverbs

lam a great communicator and team player, but | also work well independently

l am very hard-working and although | dont yet have much experience in this

Interviewer Candidate Both particular field, [learn quickly. | understand that this position calls for somebody

who is both creative and innovative, as well as resilient and able to make rational

decisions, even in stressful situations

1. questions to the employer 6. summary of personal profile, background,

a Saree te renee Serene Sr c Match the words from the text above to their German equivalents.

3. discussion about salary 7. short presentation of the company ;

4, reasons for application 8. summary of job role and responsibilities 1independently | 2 yet | 3 field | Aveminftig | B Bereich | C bislang |

5. welcome and introduction 9. information about next steps 4 to call for | 5 resilient | 6 rational D widerstandsfahig | E unabhängie |

F benötigen

Arrange the elements 1.-9. into a logical order as you would expect them to come up in an

interview conversation.

5] applicatio ns

4 Role play: job interview in English

Work in pairs. Choose one of the job advertisements on page 111 or go online and find an

interesting position. Conduct a job interview for the position, using the structure and phrases

below for guidance.

2 Preparing for an interview

4 Read the tips about how to prepare for an interview. Can you think of any more?

Discuss ideas in class.

DO DONT

_.. fesearch the company, Its products and i the Interviewer - always bet

the job role and responsibilities them finish their sentence or question before Greet the candidate, thank them for meet-

... have your documents and notes to hand - you start speaking. ing you and make polite small talk. Greet the interviewer in retum, thank them

your CV, cover letter, your questions written el a. spas ar casual, for the invitation and make polite small talk.

down and a pen and paper to take notes. ... speak 100 q or talk about things that : 7

a pracsioe srnererites qusadions tie inner einen te wienion aed Offer a brief introduction and outline of the

viewer might ask you, on your own or with a

friend or family member,

oo» Check your equipment is working properly

... be afraid to ask the inverndewer to repeat

themselves If you didn't hear or understand.

oo Worry If you have to take afew moments

company and role and ask the candidate

why they are interested in the position

Introduce yourself, give your reasons for

applying and say what interests you about

the job and the company.

beforehand and use a quiet and tidy space to think abour your answer before you Ask the candidate what makes them suit-

where you won't be interrupted, if your inter- respond. able for the position - check qualifications,

view Is online experience, skills and personal qualities. Summarise your relevant qualifications and

experience, talk about your skills and per-

sonal qualities and say how these things

ch) A b Listen to the podcast with the manager of a careers agency and answer the questions Ask the candidate if they have any questions would enable you to contribute to the role.

@O@uzkz OW

1. What does Luke say Is the best way to handle nerves before a job Interview?

2. According to Luke, what is the point of unusual, abstract questions In a job Interview?

3, Which tips does Luke give for a video interview?

1 stable | 2 quiet room | 3 digital device |

4 video conferencing | 5 smart, formal

c Match the terms to form a list of things needed for an online interview.

Asoftware | B clothing | C without

distractions | D internet connection |

E with a camera and microphone

about the company, role or responsibilities,

Explain what will happen next and thank

the candidate for their time

Ask about the company, role, working

environment etc. and about the next stages

of the recruitment process.

Express your interest in the role again and

thank the employer for the opportunity to

meet them and introduce yourself.

--- Seite 56 ---
BEBHE

“basic

applications

applications

“gramtenses

sgram

adjectives

fgramadverbs

sikillev

skill

coverletter

“skill

interview

APPLICATIONS

Review

Before you test yourself in Exom proctice, take a few moments to reflect on what you

have just learned. Then make a follow-up plan: What do you need to improve before the

final exam? How will you go about petting there? You cancheck again after Exam practice

In this unit, you have learned how to ...

understand a job advertisement | put together a CV | write a cover letter | structure a job

interview | prepare for an interview | take part in a job interview in English

1 Considering these topics and tasks, ask yourself:

Vocabulary Do | know the relevant words and phrases needed to ...

understand a job advertisement | put together a CV | write a cover letter |

structure a job interview | prepare for an interview | take part ina job

interview in English?

Can I understand these relevant words and phrases confidently in reading

and listening and use them in speaking and in writing?

Grammar When writing and/ or speaking, did | come across a common source of

grammar mistakes?

If so, what was it and how can | practise and improve in this particular area?

Writing Do | know how to structure a Cy?

Do I know how to write a cover letter?

Speaking Can | answer interview questions and take part in a job interview?

Methods / Can | understand a job advertisement to prepare an application accordingly?

Strategies Can | anticipate what might come up in a job interview and prepare

accordingly?

2 Use your answers from 1 to create a learning and revision plan.

WHAT? HOW? WHEN?

Whatdo | need to work on! What will | do to improve? When do I want to

complete this?

Pc) | UMaine eee reer ear ee SE cea eine eS cr EEE

If you are applying for several positions at once, you can often reuse the documents that

| you've already prepared. Make sure to adapt the relevant parts so that they fit to each role

and company - especially in the cover letter.

oO U 22x N DC

~~, fio

Exam practice

1 Bewerbungsunterlagen in der Fremdsprache (Bearbeitungszeit 45 Minuten)

Verfassen Sie ein Bewerbungsschreiben auf Englisch für die ausgeschriebene Stelle. Denken

Sie an Informationen zu Ihrer Person, Ausbildung, Erfahrungen und Eignung für die Position.

Internship: Events coordinater A

Do you have strong organisational skills and a good eye for detail’ Do you enjoy working in

a team? Then this could be the job for you! jamBrite Events Is an intemational events agency

with clients across Europe. We are looking for a settimotivated indivickaal to support the

events Management team with coordination and administrative tasks. You will be responsible

for booking suppliers, arranging meetings and keeping the accounts, files and day-to-day

Office processes running smoothly. You should be able to work efficiently within a fast-paced

environment and have exteptional communication skills. if this sounds like the Internship for you,

please send your application documents to mpollinighjambnite... by 28 April 20... ¥

2 Vermerk über ein Telefongespräc (Bearbeitungszeit 20 Minuten)

Im folgenden Gespräch sind Sie Martina Pollini von der Finma JamBrite Events. Sie führen ein

Telefongesprach mit joshua Bell, einem potenziellen Praktikanten. Verfolgen Sie das

Gespräch und fertigen Sie für die Personalabtellung eine Gesprachsnotiz auf Deutsch an.

Martina Pollini Joshua |

Hi joshua, this is Martina Pollini calling from jamBrite Events

I'm also glad to discuss your application! $o, perhaps you could start off by telling me

what interests you in the internship at jamBrite?

Right, OK! And do you have any experience in the event management industry?

Great - that sounds interesting. So, joshua, what would you say are your greatest

strengths and weaknesses!

It all counts! And your weaknesses?

| see. That's actually an important skill in events management, but its also something

you can pick up and improve with practice. Now, do you have any questions you want

to ask me, joshua?

Right Well to begin with, you'd be working alongside Tina, an experienced event

manager. Tina has a large contact pool of various freelancers who provide the

different services that make up a successful event. She usually has 3 or 4 projects on

the go, so she'll be sure to keep you busy!

We have a few more candidates to speak to, but you'll hear from us with our decision

within the coming fortnight.

You're more than welcome. Thanks for your time, joshua. Speak to you soon.

--- Seite 57 ---
ANHANG

Fe ad

@O@uzkz OW

ROLE CARDS

UNIT 3

Offers

Business scenario, Step 2

+ Role card A: see page 32

Role card 6 - Lantbruk, Stockholm, Schweden

« Nehmen Sie den Telefonanruf eines deutschen Landmaschinenherstellers an.

Sie intenessieren sich für den Vertrieb der deutschen Maschinen, da deutsche Land-

maschinen einen guten Ruf haben. Sie brauchen allerdings mehr informationen und fragen

nach einer möglichen Worführung der verschiedenen Maschinen.

verabreden Sie sich zu einem Verhandlungseesprach, wo mögliche Themen wie Lieferung,

Service, Bezahlung etc besprochen werden können.

Legen Sie gemeinsam Zeitpunkt und Dauer des Besuchs fest.

Sie freuen sich sehr über die Übernahme der Reisekosten durch die deutsche Firma.

Sie möchten alle besprochenen Details per E-Mail erhalten und werden eine Bestätigung

Ihrer Resedaten zusenden

Verabschieden Sie sich angemessen

UNIT 4

Orders

Business scenario, Step 1

+ Role card A: see page 44

Role card 6 - Sono Inc., janice Stevens, Sales Europe

Nehmen Sie den Anruf entgegen.

Sie sind für den Verkauf von 3D-Druckern zuständig.

Ihre Firma hat bereits Erfahrung auf dem Gebiet. Fragen Sie, wie AEP auf Ihre Firma

gekommen ist

Nennen Sie die Preise Ihrer 3D-Drucker: je nach Model zwischen 3.000 und 8,000 US-Dollar.

Lieferung eines Testgeräts ist kein Problem, die Arbeitseinweisung könnte via Webkonferenz

stattfinden

Fragen Sie, wie viele Geräte AEP eventuell im Anschluss bestellen würde

Sagen Sie, dass Sie direkt nach Bestelleingang liefern können

Verabschieden Sie sich angemessen

UNIT 5

Delivery

Business scenario, Step 3

Role card A - Baumaschinen KG, Hamburg

Rufen Sie bei Kuma Mining Germany an.

Stellen Sie sich als Assistent/-in von Herrn Bistram vor

Erklären Sie, dass sich die Lieferung der bestellten Ersatzteile verzögern wird,

Erklären Sie Hern Kumari die möglichen Alternativen

Versichem Sie dem Kunden, dass Sie alles tun werden, um eine Lösung zu finden, damit die

Ersatzteile so schnell wie möglich ausgeliefert werden können. Weisen Sie auf höhere

Gewalt hin,

Laden Sie Hern Kumari ein, Ihre Produktionsstätte in Hamburg zu besuchen.

Fragen Sie nach einem Termin

Entschuldigen Sie sich für die Verzögerung und beenden Sie das Gespräch freundlich

Role card B - Herr Kumari, Kuma Mining Germany

Nehmen Sie den Anruf entgegen.

Lassen Sie sich den Namen buchstabieren und fragen Sie, worum es geht

Sie sind entsetzt, da Sie die Teile dringend benötigen.

Betonen Sie, dass die Ersatzteile schnellstmöglich geliefert werden müssen, da sonst ein

Produktionsstillstand droht.

Bedanken Sie sich für das Engagement eine schnelle Lösung zu finden und bitten Sie darum,

dass man Se auf dem Laufenden hält.

Gute Idee. Sie würden das Werk gerne besichtigen.

Sie werden sich direkt mit Herm Bistram in Verbindung setzen und mit ihm einen Termin

vereinbaren,

Beenden Sie das Gespräch mit einem freundlichen Schluss

UNIT 6

Payment

Business Scenario, Step 2

» Role card A: see page 67

Role Card B - Ole Sorensen, Lantbruk AB

Rufen Sie bei der Firma Sorglos GmbH an.

Erklären Sie, dass Sie eine Frage zur Rechnung Nr. R-5834-23 haben,

Sagen Sie, dass die Rechnung von der Buchhaltung Ihrer Firma bereits bezahlt wurde, und

Sie leider erst jetzt bemerkt haben, dass in der Rechnung kein Einführungsraböatt berück-

sichtigt worden ist. Sie erinnern daran, dass bei Ihrem Besuch in Hannover ein Einführungs-

rabatt von 5% in Aussicht gestellt wurde.

Hehrnen Sie die Entschuldigung an und fragen Sie, wie nun weiter verfahren wird,

Akzeptieren Sie den Vorschlag.

Bedanken Sie sich und kündigen Sie weitere Bestellungen an. Verabschieden Sie sich

angemessen

--- Seite 58 ---
a, i i |

Exam practice, Aufgabe 3 U N IT 9

» Role card A: see page A

Role card B — Priifer/-in Making arrangements

You are George O'Connor of GIVIX LTD

Workshop C, Aufgabe 2

+ You are taking the call from SAS Print GmbH regarding the reminder for invoice R-186- » Role card A: see page 103

* Your accounts department transferred the amount of 2450.00 € (2,500.00 € less 2% early Role card B - Hotel receptionist, Skye Hotel, Edinburgh

payment discount) to the account given at Commerzbank Duisburg.

You suggest checking the IBAN. The IBAN stated on the invoice is DE38 3504 0085 0134 3132 13.

After finding out that this number was not correct, you accept the apologies and a payment

discount of 5%.

* Sie arbeiten als Rezeptionist/-in im Skye Hotel in Edinburgh. Sie erhalten einen Anruf von

Melek Kaya,

« Bitten Sie Melek Kaya, Namen und Details der Reservierung zu wiederholen.

* Firdie Stornierung wird keine Gebühr berechnet, da die Stomierung rechtzeitig erfolet ist.

Eine Gebühr wird nur im Falle einer späten Stornierung erhoben. Für die bereits geleistete

U N ij 7 Zahlung bieten Sie einen Gutschein an.

« Sie werden die Rückerstattung veranlassen.

* Verabschieden Sie sich höflich

Complaints and adjustments

3 1es5 Scenario, Step Workshop C Aufpabe 3a

ILUSINESS Scenario, Step 2

+ Bole card A: see page 80 + Role card A: see page 104

Role card B - Nancy McMara, Cycling Ltd, Belfast Role card B - Indira Chaudhary

; Melden Sie sich am Telefon

5 ali sie de Sigi un er N: « Bitten Sie um einen Moment Zeit, um im Buchungssystem nachzuschauen

NEN. ee ; = Bestätigen Sie dann die Standbuchung: Eckstand, 25m?, mit separatem Konferenzbereich.

+ Beschreiben Sie nochmals kurz, was das Problem mit der Lieferung war. Erklären Sie höflich, » Fragen Sie nach der Mailadresse

aber bestimmt, dass es für Sie wichtig ist, darauf vertrauen zu können, dass Bestellungen « Wiederholen Sie die Mailadresse. Kündigen Sie an, die Bestätigung so schnell wie möglich

sorgfältig und korrekt ausgeführt werden. zu senden

« Erinnern Sie daran, dass Sie die T-Shirts dringend benötigen .

* Fragen Sie, was Sie mit den falsch gelieferten T-Shirts machen sollen. Sie können nicht alle Se

T-Shirts behalten.

Exam practice

» Role card A: see page 109

Stimmen Sie dem angebotenen Rabatt zu,

Bitten Sie den die Anrufer in seinen [ihren Namen zu buchstabieren.

Sie sind froh, dass die Sache so schnell geklärt werden konnte, Sie nchten herzliche Grüße zurnenn

an Richard Becker aus und verabschieden sich Role card B - Priifer/-in

You are Christine Dong of Wong Lee Instruments in Hong Kong and work as an assistant to

Mr Wu (European customer liaison officer),

Someone from Astroglobe GmbH in Meissen, Germany, calls you to discuss Ms Pollnow’s

forthcoming visit to Wong Lee Instruments and to give flight details.

Tell the caller that you will arrange to have Ms Pollnow picked up from the airport at around

8.45 am. Depending on the traffic, it may take a bit longer. The driver will carry a sign with

the company's name on it,

Head of the research department is Harry Zuang-Wu

The meeting with Mr Wu-Dziao is scheduled from 10 am to around 1 pm. Mr Wu-Dziao was

hoping to have lunch with Ms Pollnow after the meeting, Ask the caller if Ms Pollnow could

do the city sightseeing touron the Wednesday.

oO U. gow DC ee

--- Seite 59 ---
@O@uzkz OW

HINWEISE ZU DEN PRUFUNGSTEILEN

Zusatzqua ifikation Englisch für kaufmännische Auszubildende

Schriftliche Prüfung

Geschäftsbrief nach Stichworten

5202 a) der Rechtiwarschrift - Richter: 45 Minuten

Es muss ein vollständiger, unterschriftsreifer Geschäftsbrief nach vorgegebenen Stichworten

verfasst werden, mit Absenderadresse, Anschrift (mit Länderangabe und evtL Namen des

Empfängers), Datum, Anrede, Betreff, Grußformel, Namen und Position des Unterzeichners

und gegebenenfalls Anlagevermerk. In seiner äußeren Form soll der Brief je nach Empfänger

englischen oder amerikanischen Gepflogenheiten entsprechen. Das erste Wort elmer

englischen Korrespondenz wird groß geschrieben.

Ein allgemeines, zweisprachiges Wörterbuch Ist erlaubt, muss aber mitgebracht werden.

Alle unter den beiden Rubriken Situation und Aufgabe enthaltenen relevanten Angaben sind

in den Brief einzubeziehen. Die Stichwortangaben sollten jedoch möglichst nicht übersetzt,

sondern mit Hilfe der kaufmännischen terms and phrases zu einem selbständie formulierten

Brief verarbeitet werden.

Da bel der Beurteilung des Inhalts eines Geschäftsbriefs neben den Kriterien sachliche

Richtigkeit, inhaltliche Vollständigkeit und Gedankenführung (Gliederung) auch die Punkte

Situationsangemessenheit und Wirkung eine Rolle spielen, sollte darauf geachtet werden,

dass der richtige Ton getroffen wird, z.B. kundenbezogen-freundlich bei einem Angebot,

sachlich-drängend im Falle einer Mahnung. Man darf jedoch nicht außer Acht lassen, dass

englischsprachige Geschäftskorrespondenz in der Regel verbindlicher formuliert wird als

deutsche.

Kurzgefasste Mitteilung per moderner Telekommunikation (E-Mail)

G21 bi der Rechtworschiih - Bch 0 Minen

Auf die fremdsprachige Vorlage (E-Mail, Fax, Brief, Memo, Rechnung u.ä.) muss mit Hilfe von

deutschen Stichwortangaben angemessen, d.h. nicht nur inhaltlich korrekt, sondern auch in

entsprechendem Ton unter Beachtung der durch die Vorlage vorgegebenen Anrede (evtl. Vor-

namen) und Grußformel reagien werden. Es empfiehlt sich, die Vorlage sorgfältig zu lesen,

sie kann nützliche Vokabeln und Wendungen enthalten. In Übereinstimmung mit der

englischen Vorlage kann ein Informeller Stil unter Verwendung von Zusammenziehungen

(don’t, we'd etc.) und allgemein gebräuchlichen Abkürzungen (asap, pls etc.) angebracht sein.

Beim Ausfüllen eines vorgegebenen Fommblatts für die Mitteilung ist auf Vollständigkeit zu

achten, vor allem der Betreff dart nicht übersehen werden. Ein allgemeines zweisprachiges

Wörterbuch darf benutzt werden.

3 Vermerk in Deutsch über ein in der Fremdsprache geführtes Telefongespräch

52020 der Rechisvorscinilt - Richie assche Bich Aulgabendarbienng: 0 Minen

Die zu prüfenden Personen erhalten eine Situationsbeschreibung mit Aufgabe. Dann wird ein

Telefongesprach zweimal zu Gehör gebracht. Was der deutsche Gesprächstellnehmer auf

Englisch sagt, liegt schriftlich vor. in diese Vorlage dürfen während des Gesprächs Notizen

gemacht werden. Die entsprechenden Spalten des Vordrucks für den Vermerk sind korrekt

auszufüllen. Bei den Angaben zum ausländischen Gesprächspartner darf der Name der Firma

nicht fehlen. Wenn möglich, sind auch die Stadt und das Land anzugeben. Die Rubrik Betrifft

muss unbedingt ausgefüllt werden. Der Hinweis Dringend kann erforderlich sein. Der Ver-

merk soll alle wichtigen Angaben (Fakten, Namen, Zahlen, Daten) enthalten und so voll-

ständige sein, dass er auch Dritten, die mit der Angelegenheit nicht vertraut sind, später als

Handlungserundlage dienen kann. Aus diesem Grund muss alles Wichtige, das der deutsche

Gesprachspartner sagt, ebenfalls in den Vermerk eingearbeitet werden. Unwichtiges und

Überflüssiges sollte nicht wiedergegeben werden. Für Verstöße gegen die Regeln der

deutschen Grammatik, Rechtschreibung und Zeichensetzung werden Punkte abgezogen.

Deutsch ist Prüfungssprache. indirekte Rede im Konjunktiv ist nicht erforderlich. Ein all

gemeines zweisprachiges Wörterbuch darf benutzt werden. Ein Vermerk hat in der Regel

keine fürmliche Anrede und Grußformel,

} Vermerk über einen Geschäftsbrief

5202 dc der Rechtworschriften = Richtzeie 30 Minuten

Die Prüfungsteilnehmer erhalten eine Situationsbeschreibung mit Aufgabe sowie eine

schriftliche Geschäftskorrespondenz, über die sie einen zusammenfaßsenden Vermerk für

einen Dritten erstellen müssen. Beim Ausfüllen des Vordrucks ist zu beachten, dass, abee-

sehen von den Angaben zu Verfasser/-in und Empfanger/-in des Vermerks, dem Datum und

dem Namen des Verfassers des Geschäftsbriefs, wenn möglich auch dessen Position angege-

ben werden sollte, sowie Name und Anschrift (Ort und Land) der Firma. Unter der Rubrik

Betrifft ist der Hauptgegenstand des Briefes zu mennen. Der vorgelegte Geschäftsbrief darf

nicht übersetzt werden, sondern muss unter Einbeziehung aller wichtigen Informationen so

zusammengefasst werden, dass er - wie der Teleforwermerk - auch Dritten, die mit der An-

gelegenhelt nicht vertraut sind, später als Handlungserundiage dienen kann. Belangiose,

wiederholte oder rein füllende Aussagen sollten weggelassen werden, da in der Praxis ein

knapper Vermerk, der jedoch alles Wesentliche enthält, einer weitschweilfigen Inhaltsangabe

vorzuziehen ist. Die Beherrschung der deutschen Sprache Ist auch hier ein Bewertungs-

kriterium. Ein allgemeines, zweisprachiges Wörterbuch darf benutzt werden

> Nachweis der Fremdsprachenbeherrschung durch einen Sprachergänzungstest

§2(2) der Bechnworschrift - Bearbeitungsreit: 25 Minuten

Es darf kein Wörterbuch benutzt werden. Der Test umfasst zwei Lückentexte, Mit Text 1 wird

die Beherrschung des kaufmännischen Wortschatzes und der Redewendungen getestet.

20 der 23 angegebenen Wörter sind in die Lücken einzusetzen. Text 2 dient der Überprüfung

der Kenntnisse grammatischer Strukturen und Präpositionen. Von je drei Alternativen pro

Lücke ist die jeweils korrekte in eine der 30 Lücken einzusetzen, Gerade dieser Prifungstell

bedarf wiederholter, intensiver Übung.

--- Seite 60 ---

ANHANG

Teil 1

@O@uzkz OW

HINWEISE ZU DEN PRUFUNGSTEILEN

Mündliche Prüfung

Gespräch in der Fremdsprache

Unterhaltung über Themen des Ausbildungsbereichs und Rollenspiel

5213 bider Rechtswoschrin - Dauer der mündlichen Prüfung ca. 20 Minuaen

Bel der Unterhaltung mit einem Prüfer [einer Priferin (Teil 1) z.B. über den Ausbildungs-

betrieb, die durchlaufenen Abteilungen und die Berufsschule kommt es in erster Linie auf die

gelungene Kommunikation an, erst in zweiter Linie auf sprachliche Korrektheit. Mit dem

Rollenspiel (Teil 2) (z.B. Empfang eines Besuchers) soll die Fähigkeit zur fremdsprachlichen

Bewältigung häufle auftretender Allttagssituationen nachgewiesen werden. Es darf kein

Wörterbuch benutzt werden,

Telefongespräch geschäftlicher Natur in der Fremdsprache

§2 (3) a) der Rechtwarschrift - Dawer der mündbchen Prüfung ca. 20 Minuten

Die zu prüfende Person erhält schriftliche Angaben in Deutsch zu einem Geschaftsfall und

darf sich einige Minuten schriftlich auf das Tetefongespräch vorbereiten, das er /sie mit

einem Prüfer / einer Prüferin führen wird. Es empfiehlt sich dabei, lediglich leicht lesbare

Stichworte niederzuschreiben. Auch bei diesem Prüfungsteil ist vor allem die erfolgreiche

Kommunikation wichtig, d.h. die Brauchbarkeit des Telefonats für die Praxis sowie die Be-

herrschung der gängigen Telefonredewendungen. Es darf kein Wörterbuch benutzt werden.

Gespräch in der Fremdsprache

523 bb der Rechtworschihen

Unterhaltung über Themen des Ausbildungsbereichs

Eine/-r der drei Prüfer /-innen beginnt die Unterhaltung mit dem Prüfling etwa wie folgt:

Good moming /afternoon ...

Could you introduce yourself, please?

Where do you live?

Where are you doing your traineeship?

How long have you been working for ...?

When did you start your training?

When does it finish?

Darauf könnte ein Gespräch über die Firma folgen:

Could you describe your firm?

What are its main products or services?

Is it a manufacturer or a services company?

How many people does it employ roughly?

Does it have subsidiaries or branches?

Where are its main markets - domestic, EU or overseas?

How well is this particular sector doing at the present time?

Teil 2

Fragen zur Ausbildung im engeren Sinne kommen auch häufig vor:

« Where are you attending vocational school?

* Are you on block release or do you attend school one day a week?

« What are your favourite subjects?

* Do you find vocational school useful in your work?

* Could you tell us more about your work? Which departments have you worked in?

* Which did you prefer? Was there any department you didn't like?

« Could you descnbe your daily routine?

* How in your opinion could the training in your company be improved?"

« Could you describe the dual system of vocational training in Germany?”

* When are you going to sit your final exam? What will be the main subjects?

* What field would you like to work in when you have completed your training?

Thermen fur besonders Bulle Kandidaten Kanddainnen

Einige allgemeine Themen könnten ebenfalls angesprochen werden:

What are your plans for the future (work, further training, travel)?

* Have you ever been to the UK or USA or another English-speaking country?

* Could you describe your impressions?

- Are you interested in music or sport?

* What are your hobbies?

Das Gespräch in der Fremdsprache soll jedoch eine echte Unterhaltung sein, kein

Frage- und Antwortsplel In erster Linie kommt es auf die gelungene Kommunikation an,

erst In zweiter Linie auf sprachliche Korrektheit.

Bewältigung häufig auftretender Alltagssituationen

§2(2 bb der Recht worschrihen

Die Fahigkelt zur Bewältigung häufig auftretender Alltagssituationen wird in einem Rollen-

spiel nachgewiesen. Es könnte etwa wie folgt aussehen: Ein/-e Prifer/-in spielt beispielswel-

se eine/n Besucher/-in aus dem Ausland, der/ die einen Termin mit dem Vorgesetzten / der

Vorgesetzten des Prüflings hat, aber etwas zu früh kommt. Oder der Vorgesetzte steckt im

Stau und wird voraussichtlich ca. 15 Minuten Verspätung haben. Vom Prüfling wind enwartet,

dass er/sie sich um den Besucher kümmert:

* Good morning, Mr/ Mrs! Miss/ Ms X

* I'm afraid Mr X is still in a meeting. Heil be finished in about 10 minutes’ time /

Mr X has rung to say he’s stuck in traffic and will be here in about 15 minutes,

May || take your coat/umbrella?

Did you have a good journey’ / How was your flight?

Would you like to make yourself comfortable here until Mr X arrives?

Would you perhaps like some tea or coffee?

Would you like milk or lemon with the tea?

Perhaps you'd like to look at the Financial Times or our company brochure while

you're waiting

--- Seite 61 ---
u iia

Weitere mögliche small talk-Themen:

Incoterms® 2020

The weather here and where the visitor has come from

Hotel accommodation

Local public transport

Local and regional attractions .

Local food and drink

Current events - e.g. carnival, football matches, tennis toumament etc.

Where to spend the evening (restaurants /pubs/ concerts / musicals)

How to get to main station / exhibition centre/ airport/ town centre

Seller

1. Any mode or modes of transport

Andere denkbare Situationen könnten Verkaufsgespräche oder eine Kundenberatung sein,

: 3 ERW sellers

die zum Arbeitsgebiet der zu prüfenden Person gehören. rh premkes

FLA omit corner

‚risk

CPT (ORE place of destination

risk

ciP cost + insurance place of destination

risk

DAP cnet place of destination

rie re ay for unloading

DPu cont place of destination

rea untoaded

oor toe + cto duties place of destination

risk

il. Sea and inland waterway transport

FAS cot alongside ship

risk in port of ahlpmem

FOB cost on board ship

risk in por of shipment

CFR cost port of deiination

tisk on bod rd ship in pan of shipmene

cıE dit + insurance por oldewinanion

ae on bad shig in port of shipment

© inte maternal Chamber of Commerce, (KO

oO U L220%Xx NW DC | Sie a

--- Seite 62 ---
u ate

Quellennachweis

8 Getty Images Plus, München (E+/Cecile _Arcurs), 9 ShutterStockcom RF, New York (aoodStudio); 12 Getty Images Plus, München

(E+ !cokad.a); 16 ShutierStock com RF, New York (hector: 17 Shutterstock com RF, New York (Dien; 18 ShutterStock com RE New York

GasinTiechall, 24 Getty Images, München (Westendé1k 30 Shutterstockcom RF Kew York (nclasen) 36 Getty Images Plus, München (E+/

svetion); 44 Getty images Plus, München (iStock/iryiny) 48.1 ShutierStock.com RF, New York (Funtap); 44.2 iStockphowm, Calgary Alberta jay

Lararin) 483 stock adobe com, Dublin (Acnaleksy); 48.4 Shutterstock com RF New York (Berreyves Babelon) 46.5 stockadobe.com, Dubin

(EvrenKalinbacak); 50.4 Shutterstock com RF, New York (Grewovan), 50.2 Shutterstock com RF. Mew York (Kievan) 514 ShutterStock com RF

New York (Good Shop Background); $12 ShutterStocic.com RF, New York (fay Myi My); 513 ShutterStock.com RF, New York (Drew3üdh

S14 Shutterstock. com RF, New York (MUSTAFA HAMDIEV), 51.5 ShutterSteck.com RF, New York (sirikorn thamniyor); 91.6 Shutterstock com

RF, New York (Nikola Obradevic); SL? Shutterstock com RF, New York (Skockok 51.8 ShutterStock comRF New York (Travis Klein):

4 Shutterstock. com RF New York (Es saravruth); 57 stock. adobe.com, Dublin (Photographee. eu; 60 ShutterStock.com RF, Nev York

(PopTika) #1 ShutterSteck com RF. New York (Tond Van Grapheraft); 62 stock adobecom, Dublin (jenny onthe moon) 65 ShutterStockcom

RF, New York (Tond Ven Grapheraft); 67 Getty Images Plıs, München (iStock/kadmy) 69 ShutterStock.com RE. New York (vinap) 72 Getty

Images, Munchen (WeEtende 1; A4 Shullerstock.som Rr, Mew York (6 illustrations), 84 Shutterstock. som RF, ew Vork (Monkey Business

images); #1 ShutlerStock com RF, New York (Tera Vector) 98 Getty Images Plus, München (E+ /So6tock); 100 ShutterStockoom RF, New York

(Nomad Soul, 102 Shuttersinck.com Ef, Hew York (Alexander Dobrikov), 104 ShutterStock.com RF, New York (nclassen), 1061-3 Satzkigte

GmbH, Stuttgart 110 stockadobe.com, Dublin (Andrey Popov): 111.1 ShutterStoci.oom RF, New York (Creative Studio), 1171.2 Shutterstock.

com RE Mew Work (mad pacdblue); 113 stock adobe.com, Dublin (detaiblick-fot); 127 jupiter mages photos.com, Tucson, AZ (clipart com)

Umschlag stock adobe com, Dublin (nutawut)

--- Seite 63 ---
Business to Business

Englische Geschaftskorrespondenz und Bürokommunikation

Zusatzqualifikation Englisch für kaufmännische Auszubildende

« Bereitet fokussiert und effizient auf die Prüfung vor.

« Ermöglicht multimediales Lernen und Vorbereiten

jederzeit und überall.

« Look it up:

digital mehr erfahren mit Business Basics, Grammar,

Vocabulary, Skills sowie Templates für Geschäftsbriefe.

ISBN 978-3-12 8082578

oO UL Lo U DC

